   Analysis of Key-Ex hange Proto ols and Their Use for Building
                                                                       
                                           Se ure Channels


                                  Ran Canetti
                                                  y          Hugo Kraw zyk
                                                                                 z

                                                 May 17, 2001




                                                      Abstra t

          We present a formalism for the analysis of key-ex hange proto ols that ombines previous
      de nitional approa hes and results in a de nition of se urity that enjoys some important analyt-
      i al bene ts: (i) any key-ex hange proto ol that satis es the se urity de nition an be omposed
      with symmetri en ryption and authenti ation fun tions to provide provably se ure ommuni a-
      tion hannels; and (ii) the de nition allows for simple modular proofs of se urity: one an design
      and prove se urity of key-ex hange proto ols in an idealized model where the ommuni ation
      links are perfe tly authenti ated, and then translate them using general tools to obtain se urity
      in the realisti setting of adversary- ontrolled links. We exemplify the usability of our results by
      applying them to obtain the proof of two main lasses of key-ex hange proto ols, DiÆe-Hellman
      and key-transport, authenti ated via symmetri or asymmetri te hniques.
          Further ontributions of the paper in lude the formalization of \se ure hannels" in the
        ontext of key-ex hange proto ols, and establishing suÆ ient onditions on the symmetri en-
        ryption and authenti ation fun tions to realize these hannels.




  
    This do ument des ribes work in progress. Please he k for future updates of this work at http://eprint.ia r.org.
An extended abstra t of this work appears in the pro eedings of Euro rypt 2001, LNCS Vol. 2045.
  y
    IBM T.J. Watson Resear h Center, Yorktown Heights, New York 10598. Email: anettiwatson.ibm. om.
  z EE Department, Te hnion, Haifa, Israel. Email: hugoee.te hnion.a .il. Supported by Irwin and Bethea Green
& Detroit Chapter Career Development Chair.
Contents

1 Introdu tion                                                                                        1
  1.1 Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    2

2 Proto ol and Adversary Models: An Overview                                                          3
  2.1 Proto ols, Sessions and Key-Ex hange . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        4
  2.2 The unauthenti ated-links adversarial model (um) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          5
  2.3 The am, proto ol emulation and authenti ators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         7

3 The models                                                                                          8
  3.1   Message-Driven Proto ols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
  3.2   The unauthenti ated-links adversarial model (um). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
  3.3   Key Ex hange Proto ols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
  3.4   The am Model and Authenti ators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

4 Session-Key Se urity                                                                               13
  4.1 De nition of SK-Se urity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
  4.2 Forward Se re y . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

5 SK-Se ure Proto ols                                                                                16
  5.1   Two-move DiÆe-Hellman in the am . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        18
  5.2   SK-se ure DiÆe-Hellman Proto ol in the um . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        20
  5.3   A publi -key en ryption-based proto ol without pfs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       21
  5.4   Proto ols based on shared keys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   25

6 Appli ations to Se ure Channels                                                                    26
  6.1 A Template Proto ol: Network Channels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        26
  6.2 Network Authenti ation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     27
  6.3 Network En ryption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     33
      6.3.1 Dis ussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   34
  6.4 Se ure Channels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    35

A More on Related Work                                                                               43
1    Introdu tion

Key-ex hange proto ols (ke, for short) are me hanisms by whi h two parties that ommuni ate over
an adversarially- ontrolled network an generate a ommon se ret key. ke proto ols are essential
for enabling the use of shared-key ryptography to prote t transmitted data over inse ure networks.
As su h they are a entral pie e for building se ure ommuni ations (a.k.a \se ure hannels"), and
are among the most ommonly used ryptographi proto ols ( ontemporary examples in lude SSL,
IPSe , SSH, among others).
    The design and analysis of se ure ke proto ols has proved to be a non-trivial task, with a
large body of work written on the topi , in luding [18, 39, 12, 9, 19, 7, 8, 32, 2, 43℄ and many
more. In fa t, even today, after two de ades of resear h, some important issues remain without
satisfa tory treatment. One su h issue is how to guarantee the adequa y of ke proto ols for their
most basi appli ation: the generation of shared keys for implementing se ure hannels. Providing
this guarantee (with minimal requirements from ke proto ols) is the main fo us and obje tive of
this work. The other entral goal of the paper is in simplifying the usability of the resultant se urity
de nitions via a modular approa h to the design and analysis of ke proto ols. We exemplify this
approa h with a proof of se urity for two important lasses of ke proto ols.
    This paper adopts a methodology for the analysis of ke proto ols that results from the om-
bination of two previous works in this area: Bellare and Rogaway [7℄ and Bellare, Canetti and
Kraw zyk [2℄. A main ingredient in the formalization of [7℄ is the use of the indistinguishability
approa h of [24℄ to de ning se urity: roughly speaking, a key-ex hange proto ol is alled se ure if
under the allowed adversarial a tions it is infeasible for the atta ker to distinguish the value of a
key generated by the proto ol from an independent random value. Here we follow this exa t same
approa h but repla e the adversarial model of [7℄ with an adversarial model derived from [2℄. This
 ombination allows to a hieve the above two main obje tives. We elaborate on these main aspe ts
of our work.
    First, the formalization of [2℄ aptures not only the spe i needs of ke proto ols but rather
develops a more general model for the analysis of se urity proto ols. This allows formulating and
proving the statement that ke proto ols proven se ure a ording to our de nition (we all these
proto ols SK-se ure) an be used in standard ways to provide \se ure hannels". More spe i ally,
 onsider the ommon se urity pra ti e by whi h pairs of parties establish a \se ure hannel" by rst
ex hanging a session key using a ke proto ol and then using this key to en rypt and authenti ate
the transmitted data under symmetri ryptographi fun tions. We prove that if in this setting
one uses an SK-se ure ke proto ol together with se ure MAC and en ryption fun tions ombined
appropriately then the resultant hannel provides both authenti ation and se re y (in a sense that
we de ne pre isely) to the transmitted data. While this property of ensuring se ure hannels seems
as an obvious requirement from a se ure ke proto ol it turns out that formalizing and proving this
property is non-trivial. In fa t, there are \seemingly se ure" key ex hange proto ols that do not
ne essarily guarantee this (e.g. those that use the session key during the ex hange itself), as well
as proposed de nitions of se ure key-ex hange that do not suÆ e to guarantee this either (e.g., the
de nitions in [7, 10, 11, 2℄). Moreover, although several works have addressed this issue (see Se tion
1.1), to the best of our knowledge the notion of se ure hannels was never formalized in the ontext
of ke proto ols, let alone demonstrating that some de nition of ke proto ols suÆ es for this basi
task. Indeed, one of the ontributions of this work is a formalization of the se ure hannels task.
While this formalization is not intended to provide general omposability properties for arbitrary
 ryptographi settings, it arguably provides suÆ ient se urity guarantee for the entral task of
prote ting the integrity and authenti ity of ommuni ations over adversarially- ontrolled links.

                                                  1
     Se ond, the approa h of [2℄ allows for a substantial simpli ation in designing ke proto ols and
proving their se urity. This approa h postulates a two-step methodology by whi h proto ols an
  rst be designed and analyzed in a mu h simpli ed adversarial setting where the ommuni ation
links are assumed to be ideally authenti ated (i.e., the atta ker is not allowed to insert or hange
information transmitted over the ommuni ation links between parties). Then, in a se ond step,
these proto ols are \automati ally" transformed into se ure proto ols in the realisti s enario of
fully adversary- ontrolled ommuni ations by applying a proto ol translation tool (or \ ompiler")
  alled an authenti ator. Fortunately, simple and eÆ ient realizations of authenti ators based on
di erent ryptographi fun tions exist [2℄ thus making it a useful and pra ti al design and analysis
tool. (We stress that our framework does not mandate this methodology; i.e., it is possible of
  ourse to prove se urity of a ke proto ol dire tly in the fully adversarial model.)
     We use this approa h to prove the se urity of two important lasses of key-ex hange proto ols:
DiÆe-Hellman and key-transport proto ols. All one needs to do is to simply prove the se urity
of these proto ols in the ideal authenti ated-links model and then, thanks to the above modular
approa h, one obtains versions of these proto ols that are se ure in a realisti adversary- ontrolled
network. The \authenti ated" versions of the proto ols depend on the authenti ators in use. These
  an be based either on symmetri or asymmetri ryptographi te hniques (depending on the trust
model) and result in natural and pra ti al ke proto ols. The se urity guarantees that result from
these proofs are substantial as they apture many of the se urity on erns in real ommuni ations
settings in luding the asyn hronous nature of ontemporary networks, the run of multiple simul-
taneous sessions, resistan e to man-in-the-middle and known-key atta ks, maintaining se urity of
sessions even when other sessions are ompromised, and providing \perfe t forward se re y", i.e.,
prote tion of past sessions in ase of the ompromise of long-term keying material.

1.1 Related work
Sin e its introdu tion in the seminal work of DiÆe and Hellman [18℄ the notion of a key-ex hange
proto ol has been the subje t of many works (see [37℄ for an extensive bibliography). Here we
mention some of the works that are more dire tly related to the present work. We further expand
our dis ussion of these works in Appendix A.
    Among the early works on this subje t we note [39, 12, 9, 19℄ as being instrumental in pointing
out to the many subtleties involved in the analysis of ke proto ols. The rst omplexity-theoreti
treatment of the notion of se urity for ke proto ols is due to Bellare and Rogaway [7℄ who formalize
the se urity of ke proto ols in the realisti setting of on urrent sessions running in an adversary-
 ontrolled network. As said above, [7℄ apply the indistinguishability de nitional approa h that
we follow here as well. While [7℄ fo used on the shared-key model of authenti ation, other works
[10, 11, 6℄ extended the te hniques to the publi -key setting. One important ontribution of [6℄ is
in noting and xing a short oming in the original de nition of [7℄; this x, that we adopt here, is
fundamental for proving our results about se ure hannels.
    Bellare, Canetti, and Kraw zyk [2℄ present a model for studying general session-oriented se urity
proto ols that we adopt and extend here. They also introdu e the \authenti ator" te hniques that
allow for greatly simplifying the analysis of proto ols and that we use as a basi tool in our work. In
addition, [2℄ proposes a de nition of se urity of ke proto ols rooted in the simulatability (or \ideal
third party") approa h used to de ne se urity of multiparty omputation [23, 38, 1, 13℄. While this
de nitional approa h is intuitively appealing the a tual ke se urity de nition of [2℄ omes short of
the expe tations. On one hand, it seems over-restri tive, in the sense that it rules out proto ols
that seem to provide suÆ ient se urity (and as demonstrated here an be safely used to obtain

                                                  2
se ure hannels); on the other, it is not lear whether their de nition suÆ es to prove omposition
theorems even in the restri ted sense of se ure hannels as dealt with in this paper.
    More re ently, Shoup [43℄ presents a framework for the de nition of se urity of ke proto ols that
follows the basi simulatability approa h as in [2℄ but introdu es signi ant modi ations in order to
over ome some of the short omings of the ke de nition in [2℄ as well as to seek omposability with
other ryptographi appli ations. In parti ular, [43℄ states as a motivational goal the onstru tion
of \se ure sessions" (similar to our se ure hannels), and it informally laims the suÆ ien y of its
de nitions to a hieve this goal. A more rigorous and omplete elaboration of that work will be
needed to assess the orre tness of these laims. In addition, [43℄ di ers from our work in several
other interesting aspe ts (see Appendix A).
    A promising general approa h for the analysis of rea tive proto ols and their on urrent om-
position has been developed by P tzmann, S hunter and Waidner [41, 40, 42℄ and Canetti [14℄.
This approa h, that follows the simulatability tradition, an be applied to the task of key ex hange
to obtain a de nition of ke proto ols that guarantees se ure on urrent omposition with any set
of proto ols that make use of the generated keys. See more details in [16℄.
A subje tive dis ussion. The works mentioned above follow two main distin t approa hes to
de ning se urity of ke proto ols: simulation-based and indistinguishability-based. The former is
more intuitively appealing (due to its modeling of se urity via an ideally-trusted third party), and
also appears to be more amenable to demonstrating general omposability properties of proto ols.
On the other hand, the omplexity of the resulting de nitions, on e all details are lled in, is
  onsiderable and makes for de nitions that are relatively omplex to work with. In ontrast,
the indistinguishability-based approa h yields de nitions that are simpler to state and easier to
work with, however their adequa y for modeling the task at hand seems less lear at rst glan e.
The results in this paper indi ate the suitability of the indistinguishability-based approa h in the
  ontext of ke proto ols | if the goal is the appli ation of ke proto ols to the spe i task of se ure
 hannels as de ned here. By following this approa h we gain the bene t of simpler analysis and
easier-to-write proofs of se urity. At the same time, our work borrows from the simulation-based
approa h the modularity of building proofs via the intermediate ideally-authenti ated links model,
thus enjoying the \best of both worlds".
Organization. Se tion 2 presents an overview of the proto ol and adversary models used through-
out this work. This overview is intended to introdu e the elements of this model in a \reader-
friendly" way. The formal te hni al treatment appears in Se tion 3. The de nition of SK-se urity
for ke proto ols is presented in Se tion 4. Se tion 5 proves the se urity of several proto ols and
illustrates the modular methodology used in our analysis. Finally, in Se tion 6 we introdu e a
formalization of \se ure hannels" and demonstrate the suitability of our notion of se urity for ke
proto ols for realizing se ure hannels.

2    Proto ol and Adversary Models: An Overview

In order to to de ne what is meant by the se urity of a key-ex hange (ke) proto ol we rst need
to establish a formalism for the most basi notions: what is meant by a proto ol in general and
a key-ex hange proto ol in parti ular, what are sessions, and what is an `atta ker' against su h
proto ols. Here we use a formalism based on the approa h of [2℄, where a general framework for
studying the se urity of session-based multi-party proto ols over inse ure hannels is introdu ed.
We extend and re ne this formalism to better t the needs of pra ti al ke proto ols.
    In order to motivate and make the formalism easier to understand, we start by providing a

                                                 3
high-level overview of our model. The pre ise te hni al des ription appears in Se tion 3. (We
note that the pre ise te hni al details are essential for a full development and proof of our results.
However, we re ommend rst reading this overview in order to make the te hni al part more
understandable.) After introdu ing the proto ol and adversary models we pro eed to de ne the
se urity of ke proto ols in Se tion 4.

2.1 Proto ols, Sessions and Key-Ex hange
Message-driven proto ols We onsider a set of parties (probabilisti polynomial-time ma hines),
whi h we usually denote by P1 ; : : : ; Pn , inter onne ted by point-to-point links over whi h messages
 an be ex hanged.1 Proto ols are olle tions of intera tive pro edures, run on urrently by these
parties, that spe ify a parti ular pro essing of in oming messages and the generation of outgoing
messages. Proto ols are initially triggered at a party by an external \ all" and later by the arrival
of messages. Upon ea h of these events, and a ording to the proto ol spe i ation, the proto ol
pro esses information and may generate and transmit a message and/or wait for the next message
to arrive. We all these message-driven proto ols. (We note the asyn hronous nature of proto ols
de ned in this way whi h re e ts the prevalent form of ommuni ation in today's networks.)
Sessions and proto ol output. Proto ols an trigger the initiation of sub-proto ols (i.e. inter-
a tive subroutines) or other proto ols, and several opies of su h proto ols may be simultaneously
run by ea h party. We all ea h opy of a proto ol run at a party a session. Te hni ally, a session is
an intera tive subroutine exe uted inside a party. Ea h session is identi ed by the party that runs
it, the parties with whom the session ommuni ates and by a session-identi er. These identi ers
are used in pra ti e to bind transmitted messages to their orresponding sessions. Ea h invo ation
of a proto ol (or session) at a given party reates a lo al state for that session during exe ution, and
produ es lo al outputs by that party. This output an be a quantity (e.g a session key) returned to
the alling program, or it an be the re ording of a proto ol event (su h as a su essful or failed
termination). These lo al outputs serve to represent the \history" of a proto ol and are important
to formalize se urity. When a session ends its run we all it omplete and assume that its lo al
state is erased.
Key-ex hange proto ols. Key-ex hange (ke) proto ols are message-driven proto ols (as de ned
above) where the ommuni ation takes pla e between pairs of parties and whi h return, upon
 ompletion, a se ret key alled a session key. More spe i ally, the input to a ke proto ol within
ea h party Pi is of the form (Pi ; Pj ; s; role), where Pj is the identity of another party, s is a session
id, and role an be either initiator or responder. A session within Pi and a session within Pj are
 alled mat hing if their inputs are of the form (Pi ; Pj ; s; initiator) and (Pj ; Pi ; s; responder). The
inputs are hosen by a \higher layer" proto ol that \ alls" the ke proto ol. We require the alling
proto ol to make sure that the session id's of no two ke sessions in whi h the party parti ipates are
identi al. Furthermore, we leave it to the alling proto ol to make sure that two parties that wish
to ex hange a key will a tivate mat hing sessions. Note that this may require some ommuni ation
before the a tual ke sessions are a tivated.2
     Upon a tivation, the partners Pi and Pj of two mat hing sessions ex hange messages (the initiator
goes rst), and eventually generate lo al outputs that in lude the name of the partners of the session,
   1
      This formalization postulates a xed number of parties in a network. An alternative, more general formalization
allows the adversary to adaptively in rease the number of parti ipants. We prefer this simpler formalization sin e
the di eren e seems in onsequential with respe t to realisti ke proto ols.
    2
      Indeed, in pra ti e proto ols for setting up a se ure session typi ally ex hange some messages before the a tual
 ryptographi key-ex hange starts. The IKE proto ol of the IPSEC standard is a good example [28℄.


                                                          4
the session identi er, and the value of the omputed session key. A key establishment event is
re orded only when the ex hange is ompleted (this signals, in parti ular, that the ex hanged key
 an be used by the proto ol that alled the ke session). We note that a session an be ompleted
at one partner but not ne essarily at the other.
    After des ribing these `me hani s" of a ke proto ol we need to de ne what is meant by a
\se ure" ke proto ol. This is the subje t of Se tion 4 and it is based on the adversarial model that
we introdu e next.

2.2 The unauthenti ated-links adversarial model (um)
In order to talk about the se urity of a proto ol we need to de ne the adversarial setting that
determines the apabilities and possible a tions of the atta ker. We want these apabilities to be
as generi as possible (as opposed to, say, merely representing a list of possible atta ks) while not
posing unrealisti requirements. We follow the general adversarial formalism of [2℄ but spe ialize
and extend it here for the ase of ke proto ols. Using the terminology of [2℄ we all this model the
Unauthenti ated Links Model (um).
Basi atta ker apabilities. We onsider a probabilisti polynomial-time (ppt)3 atta ker that
has full ontrol of the ommuni ations links: it an listen to all the transmitted information, de ide
what messages will rea h their destination and when, hange these messages at will or inje t its own
generated messages. The formalism represents this ability of the atta ker by letting the atta ker
be the one in harge of passing messages from one party to another. The atta ker also ontrols the
s heduling of all proto ol events in luding the initiation of proto ols and message delivery.
Obtaining se ret information. In addition to these basi adversarial apabilities (given \for
free" to the atta ker), we let the atta ker obtain se ret information stored in the parties memories
via expli it atta ks. We onsider all the se ret information stored at a party as potentially vul-
nerable to break-ins or other forms of leakage. However, when de ning se urity of a proto ol it is
important to guarantee that the leakage of some form of se ret information has the least possible
e e t on the se urity of other se rets. For example, we will want to guarantee that the leakage of
information spe i to one session (su h as the leakage of a session key or ephemeral state infor-
mation) will have no e e ts on the se urity of other sessions, or that even the leakage of ru ial
long-term se rets (su h as private keys) that are used a ross multiple sessions will not ne essarily
 ompromise se ret information from all past sessions. In order to be able to di erentiate between
various vulnerabilities and to be able to guarantee as mu h se urity as possible in the event of in-
formation exposures, we lassify atta ks into three ategories depending on the type of information
a essed by the adversary:
Party orruption. The atta ker an de ide at any point to orrupt a party, in whi h ase the atta ker
learns all the internal memory of that party in luding long-term se rets (su h as private keys or
master shared keys used a ross di erent sessions) and session-spe i information ontained in the
party's memory (su h as internal state of in omplete sessions and session-keys orresponding to
 ompleted sessions). Sin e by learning its long term se rets the atta ker an impersonate a party
in all all its a tions then a party is onsidered ompletely ontrolled by the atta ker from the time
of orruption and an, in parti ular, depart arbitrarily from the proto ol spe i ations.
Session-key query. The atta ker provides a party's name and a session identi er of a ompleted
session at that party and re eives the value of the key generated by the named session This atta k
provides the formal modeling for leakage of information on spe i session keys that may result from
  3
      When proving spe i   proto ols one an repla e this generi ppt modeling with spe i   ryptographi assumptions.

                                                        5
events su h as break-ins, ryptanalysis, areless disposal of keys, et . It will also serve, indire tly,
to ensure that the unavoidable leakage of information produ ed by the use of session keys in a
se urity appli ation (e.g., information leaked on a key by its use as an en ryption key) will not help
in deriving further information on this and other keys.
Note: one ould de ne yet another adversary operation that would provide the atta ker with partial
information on session keys (to spe i ally model information leaked via key usage), however it turns
out that su h an addition, while adding omplexity to the model spe i ation, does not hange the
power of the model sin e session-key queries as de ned here already suÆ e to apture leakage of
any partial information on the session keys.
Session-state reveal. The atta ker provides the name of a party and a session identi er of a yet
in omplete session at that party and re eives the internal state of that session (sin e we see sessions
as pro edures running inside a party then the internal state of a session is well de ned). An
important point here is what information is in luded in the lo al state of a session; this is to
be spe i ed by ea h ke proto ol. Therefore, our de nition of se urity is parameterized by the
type and amount of information revealed in this atta k. For instan e, the information revealed in
this way may be the exponent x used by a party to ompute a value gx in a DiÆe-Hellman key-
ex hange proto ol, or the random bits used to en rypt a quantity under a probabilisti en ryption
s heme during a session. (An example where su h state information may be vulnerable to atta k is
appli ations { su h as those running in low-powered devi es { that pre- ompute, or upload, a le
of pairs (x; gx ) for use during later \real-time" establishment of ke sessions. In this ase one would
like to prevent that the exposure of su h a le, or part of it, will ompromise future sessions that
do not use these values.)
    We stress that while the rst two forms of atta k, party orruptions and session-key queries,
are fundamental to the de nition of se urity of ke proto ols, the signi an e of the session-state
reveal operation depends on the se urity model of an implementation. The di erentiation between
party orruptions and session-state reveal operations assumes that orrupting a session state does
not imply learning about long-term se rets; this impli itly assumes a separate se urity module
where the operations involving these long-term se rets are performed. In settings where this is an
unrealisti assumption, our model an be weakened by deleting the session-state reveal operation
from the atta ker's apabilities. Certainly, proto ols proven se ure under our model will remain
se ure in the weakened model.
Terminology: if a session is subje t to any of the above three atta ks (i.e. a session-state reveal, a
session-key query or the orruption of the party holding the session) then the session is alled lo ally
exposed. If a session or its mat hing session is lo ally exposed then we all the session exposed.
Session expiration. One important additional element in our se urity model is the notion of
session expiration. This takes the form of a proto ol a tion that when a tivated auses the erasure
of the named session key (and any related session state) from that party's memory. We allow a
session to be expired at one party without ne essarily expiring the mat hing session. The e e t
of this a tion in our se urity model is that the value of an expired session key annot be found
via any of the above atta ks if these atta ks are performed after the session expired. This has two
important onsequen es: it allows us to model the ommon (and good) se urity pra ti e of limiting
the life-time of individual session keys and it allows for a simple modeling of the notion of perfe t
forward se re y (see Se tion 4.2). We note that in order for a session to be lo ally exposed (as
de ned above) the atta k against the session must happen before the session expires.
Bootstrapping the se urity of key-ex hange proto ols. Key-ex hange proto ols, as other
  ryptographi appli ations, require the bootstrapping of se urity (espe ially for authenti ation) via

                                                  6
some assumed-se ure means. Examples in lude the se ure generation of parties' private keys, the
installation of publi keys of other parties, or the installation of shared \master" keys. Here too
we follow the approa h of [2℄ where the bootstrapping of the authenti ation fun tions is abstra ted
into an initialization fun tion that is run prior to the initiation of any key-ex hange proto ol and
that produ es in a se ure way (i.e. without adversarial parti ipation) the required (long-term)
information. By abstra ting out this initial phase we allow for the ombination of di erent proto ols
with di erent initialization fun tions: in parti ular, it allows our analysis of proto ols (su h as
DiÆe-Hellman) to be appli able under the two prevalent settings of authenti ation: symmetri
and a-symmetri authenti ation. Two points to note are (1) the spe i ation of the initialization
fun tion is part of the de nition of ea h ke proto ol; and (2) se ret information generated by
this fun tion at a given party an be dis overed by the atta ker only upon orruption of that
party. We stress that while this abstra tion adds to the simpli ity and appli ability of our analysis
te hniques, the bootstrapping of se urity in a tual proto ols is an element that must be arefully
analyzed (e.g., the intera tion with a CA in the ase of publi -key based proto ols). Integrating
these expli it elements into the model an be done either dire tly as done in [43℄, or in a more
modular way via appropriate proto ol omposition.

2.3 The am, proto ol emulation and authenti ators
A entral ingredient in our analyses is the methodology introdu ed in [2℄ by whi h one an design
and analyze a proto ol under the highly-simplifying assumption that the atta ker annot hange
information transmitted between parties, and then transform these proto ols and their se urity
assuran e to the realisti um where the adversary has full ontrol of the ommuni ation links. We
refer the reader to [2℄ for the details and also present a te hni al summary in Se tion 3.4.
    First, an adversarial model alled authenti ated-links model (denoted am) is de ned in a way
that is identi al to the um with one fundamental di eren e: the atta ker is restri ted to only
deliver messages truly generated by the parties without any hange or addition to them. Then, the
notion of \emulation" is introdu ed in order to apture the equivalen e of fun tionality between
proto ols in di erent adversarial models, in parti ular between the um and am. Roughly speaking,
a proto ol 0 emulates proto ol  in the um if for any adversary that intera ts with 0 in the um
there exists an adversary that intera ts with  in the am su h that the two intera tions \look
the same" to an outside observer. Finally, spe ial algorithms alled authenti ators are developed
with the property that on input the des ription of a proto ol  the authenti ator outputs the
des ription of a proto ol 0 su h that 0 emulates proto ol  in the um. That is, authenti ators a t
as an automati \ ompiler" that translate proto ols in the am into equivalent (or \as se ure as")
proto ols in the um.
    In order to simplify the onstru tion of authenti ators, [2℄ o ers the following methodology.
First onsider a very simple one- ow proto ol in the am, alled mt, whose sole fun tionality is
to transmit a single message from sender to re ipient. Now build a restri ted-type authenti ator,
 alled mt-authenti ator, required to provide emulation for this parti ular mt proto ol only. Finally,
to any su h mt-authenti ator  one asso iates an algorithm (or ompiler) C that translates any
input proto ol  into another proto ol 0 as follows: to ea h of the messages de ned in proto ol
 apply the mt-authenti ator . It is proven in [2℄ that C is an authenti ator (i.e., the resultant
proto ol 0 emulates  in the um). Parti ular realizations of mt-authenti ators are presented in [2℄
based on di erent type of ryptographi fun tions (e.g., digital signatures, publi -key en ryption,
MAC, et .)


                                                 7
3       The models

This se tion presents a te hni al des ription of the proto ol and adversary models used throughout
the paper. We strongly re ommend rst reading Se tion 2 whi h presents an overview of these
models and their motivation.

3.1 Message-Driven Proto ols
An n-party message-driven proto ol is a olle tion of n programs, where ea h program is to be
run by a di erent party. (Formally, ea h program is an intera tive ppt Turing ma hine, as de ned
in [25℄.) Ea h program has the following interfa e. It is rst invoked with some initial input
(that in ludes the party's identity), random input, and some value for the se urity parameter.
On e invoked, the program waits for an a tivation. An a tivation an be aused by two types of
events: either the arrival of an in oming message from the network, or an a tion request oming
from other programs run by the party. (De ning valid a tion requests is part of the spe i ation
of the proto ol.4 ) Upon a tivation, the program pro esses the in oming data, starting from its
 urrent internal state, and as a result it an generate outgoing messages to the network and a tion
requests to other programs run by the party. In addition, a lo al output value is generated. On e
the a tivation is ompleted, the program waits for the next a tivation. We regard the lo al output
as umulative. That is, initially the lo al output is empty; in ea h a tivation the urrent output
is appended to the previous one. We will let a proto ol label some of its lo al output as `se ret'
(e.g. the value of a se ret key generated by the proto ol). This will have e e t on the adversary's
a tions that we de ne below.
    An invo ation of a proto ol is alled a session. Note that a session of a proto ol  may involve
several sessions of other proto ols that are alled by . (When treating the spe ial ase of key-
ex hange proto ols in Se tion 3.3 the semanti s of sessions in that ontext will be given more
spe i meaning.)

3.2 The unauthenti ated-links adversarial model (um).
The adversarial model um de nes the atta ker's apabilities and its intera tion with a proto ol.
Figure 1 summarizes the way proto ols are exe uted in the presen e of a um adversary. Here we
des ribe this in some more detail. Consider an n-party message-driven proto ol , with parties
denoted by P1 :::Pn . Ea h party Pi has input xi and random input ri . In addition, we introdu e
an adversarial entity, alled a um-adversary U . (The um-adversary is another program, or a ppt
intera tive Turing ma hine, with an interfa e des ribed below.) The exe ution of proto ol  in the
um onsists of a sequen e of a tivations of  within di erent parties. The a tivations are ontrolled
and s heduled by U . That is, initially the proto ol is invoked within ea h party with a lo al input,
random input and a value for the se urity parameter. Next, and upon the ompletion of ea h
a tivation, U de ides whi h party to a tivate next, and on whi h in oming message or request. The
outgoing messages and outgoing lo al a tion requests be ome known to U . Lo al outputs be ome
known to U ex ept for those labeled `se ret'.
    Note that U is free to hoose to a tivate any party with any a tivation allowed by the proto ol
and in any order. Also, U an a tivate any party with any in oming message and any spe i ed
    4
     An a tion request an be, for instan e, a request to send a message or ex hange a key with some spe i ed party
(we will see spe i examples in the sequel). We assume that every message spe i es the sender of the message and
its intended re ipient.


                                                        8
                                         Proto ol exe ution in the um


      Parti ipants: Parties P1 ; :::; Pn running an n-party proto ol  on inputs x1 ; :::; xn , respe tively, and
      an adversary U .
         1. Initialization: Ea h party Pi invokes  on lo al input xi , se urity parameter k and random
            input. Next, Pi gets I (r; k )i and I (r; k )0 , where r is randomly hosen.
         2. While U has not terminated do:
              (a) U may a tivate  within some party, Pi . An a tivation an take two forms:
                     i. An a tion request q . This a tivation models requests or invo ations oming from
                        other programs run by the party.
                    ii. An in oming message m with a spe i ed sender Pj . This a tivation models messages
                         oming from the network.
                  If an a tivation o urred then the a tivated party Pi runs its program and hands U the
                  resulting outgoing messages and a tion requests. (We stress that U is free to hoose any
                  s heduling of a tivations and determine the values of in oming messages.) Lo al outputs
                  produ ed by the proto ol are known to U ex ept for those labeled `se ret'.
              (b) U may orrupt a party Pi . Upon orruption, U learns the urrent internal state of Pi ,
                  and a spe ial message is added to Pi 's lo al output. From this point on, Pi is no longer
                  a tivated and does not generate further lo al output.
              ( ) U may issue a session-state reveal for a spe i ed session within some party Pi . In this
                   ase, U learns the urrent internal state of the spe i ed session within Pi . This event is
                  re orded through a spe ial note in Pi 's lo al output.
              (d) U may issue a session-output query for a spe i ed session within some party Pi . In this
                   ase, U learns any output from the spe i ed session that was labeled `se ret'. This event
                  is re orded through a spe ial note in Pi 's lo al output.
         3. The global output of the exe ution is the on atenation of the outputs of U and P1 ; :::; Pn .

                                    Figure 1: Proto ol exe ution in the um.


sender. In parti ular, in oming messages need not orrespond in any way to messages that have
been sent. (That is, U is free to generate, inje t, modify, and deliver any message of its hoi e.)
    In addition to a tivating parties and ontrolling the network, U an perform the following
a tivities. First, it an orrupt parties at will. Upon orruption of Pi , U learns the entire urrent
state of Pi , in luding any long-term se ret, session states and se ret session outputs in the party's
memory. From this point on, U an deliver any message of its hoi e in whi h Pi is spe i ed as
the sender. The orrupted party Pi appends a spe ial note to its output, spe ifying that it has
been orrupted. Pi is no longer a tivated and does not generate further lo al output. (A orrupted
party is totally ontrolled by the adversary, and its a tions are taken by the atta ker itself.)
Another type of a tivity is session-state reveal of a ertain session within party Pi . The e e t is
that the internal state of the orresponding session within Pi (i.e., the lo al working spa e of the
pro edure whose invo ation onstitutes the session) be omes known to U , and a spe ial message
is added to the party's lo al output; no further output is generated for this session.5 A third
  5
      We do not spe ify how a session is identi ed; this will have to be part of the spe i ation of a proto ol. In the


                                                           9
adversarial a tivity is a session-output query. By issuing su h a query the adversary learns any
output from that session that was labeled `se ret'. (This type of queries is parti ularly important
in the ontext of key-ex hange proto ols below where this a tion is alled a `session-key query'.)
The initialization fun tion I. Finally, we augment the proto ol  with an initialization fun tion
I that models an initial phase of out-of-band and authenti ated information ex hange between
the parties. (This fun tion models the ne essary trusted bootstrapping of ryptographi fun tions,
e.g. by letting the parties hoose private and publi keys for some asymmetri rypto-system
and trustfully distributing the publi keys.) Fun tion I takes a random input r and the se urity
parameter k, and outputs a ve tor I (r; k) = I (r; k)0 ::::I (r; k)n . The omponent I (r; k)0 is the publi
information and be omes known to all parties and to the adversary. For i > 0, I (r; k)i be omes
known only to Pi . Note, however, that upon orruption of Pi the atta ker learns I (r; k)i .
Global output. The global output of running a proto ol in the um is the on atenation of the
 umulative lo al outputs of all the parties, together with the output of the adversary. The output of
the adversary is a fun tion of its internal states at the end of the intera tion. We use the following
notation. Let um-adv;U (k; ~x; ~r) denote the output of adversary U when intera ting with parties
running proto ol  on se urity parameter k, input ~x = x1 : : : xn and random input ~r = r0 : : : rn
as des ribed above (r0 for U ; xi and ri for party Pi ). (The initialization fun tion I is part of the
des ription of proto ol .) Let unauth;U (k; ~x; ~r)i denote the umulative output of party Pi after
running proto ol  on se urity parameter k, input ~x and random input ~r, and with an am-adversary
U . Let unauth;U (k; ~x; ~r) = um-adv;U (k; ~x; ~r); unauth;U (k; ~x; ~r)1 : : : unauth;U (k; ~x; ~r)n . Let
unauth;U (k; ~x) denote the random variable des ribing unauth;U (k; ~x; ~r) when ~r is uniformly
 hosen. Let unauth;U denote the ensemble funauth;U (k; ~x)gk2N;~x2f0;1g .
We have summarized the stru ture of a proto ol exe ution in the um in Figure 1.

3.3 Key Ex hange Proto ols
Key-ex hange proto ols are a spe ial ase of n-party message-driven proto ols. As su h they inherit
the syntax of general message-driven proto ols as introdu ed before. In addition, in order to
 apture the spe i semanti s of key ex hange, and the spe i               apabilities of atta kers against
su h proto ols, we spe ify some additional syntax for these proto ols. (The intention of this syntax
is to represent, in an abstra t but dire t way, the me hani s of key ex hange proto ols in a tual
systems.)
    Re all that a message-driven proto ol is a olle tion of n programs, where ea h program is
run by a di erent party. (We envision that the program is invoked on e within ea h party at the
onset of the omputation and remains a tive throughout.) On e invoked, it is a tivated either by a
message oming from the network, or by an a tion request from other proto ols or programs run by
the party. In the ase of a key-ex hange (ke) proto ol , the program within ea h party, Pi , takes
a tion requests of the form establish-session(Pi ; Pj ; s; role) where Pj is another party (with whi h a
key is to be ex hanged), s is a string alled the session-id, and role 2 finitiator; responderg. (This
a tion request will typi ally be triggered by other proto ols run by the party that \ all" the ke
proto ol, see for example Se tion 6.)
Lo al outputs of a ke proto ol are of the form (Pi ; Pj ; s; ), where Pj ; s are as above and  is a
session key. A null value of  is interpreted as a \session abortion" and will usually represent the
termination of the session with a returned error message. Non-null session-key values are labeled
 ontext of ke proto ols we will identify sessions via a session-id and the partners of the session; see more details in
the next se tion.


                                                          10
`se ret'. (Re all that the lo al outputs are thought of as values returned by the session to the
\ alling proto ol" that issued the initial establish-session a tivation.)
     We further spe ify the internal stru ture of ea h of the n programs of a ke proto ol, as follows.
Ea h su h program, running within Pi , onsists of a main pro edure ( an be thought of as a \shell")
and a spe ial subroutine, alled a ke-subroutine. An invo ation of the ke-subroutine is alled a
ke-session and is aimed at ex hanging a single key with a spe i ed party. The main pro edure
pro eeds as follows. Upon a tivation with a tion request establish-session(Pi ; Pj ; s; role), it rst
veri es that no ke-session was previously invoked (within Pi ) with inputs (Pi ; Pj ; s; role0 ) for some
role0 2 finitiator; responderg (namely, the main pro edure makes sure that the identity of the session
is unique among the sessions that Pi was requested to establish with Pj ). If the veri ation fails,
then an appropriate error message is generated. Otherwise, a ke-session is invoked with inputs
(Pi ; Pj ; s; role). From this point on, whenever the ke proto ol within Pi re eives a message that
spe i es sender Pj and session-id s, it forwards this message to the relevant ke-session within Pi .
On e a ke-session returns (typi ally, after a number of messages have been ex hanged between
Pi and Pj ) with output (Pi ; Pj ; s; ), the ke proto ol re ords a session establishment event with
parameters (Pi ; Pj ; s; ) in its lo al output. From these parameters only the value  of the session
key is labeled `se ret'. A ke-session that returns with a non-null value of  is alled ompleted. If
 = null then the ke-session is aborted and a spe ial note is re orded in the lo al output. It is
assumed by onvention that, on e a ke-session returns, its entire lo al state, ex ept for the output
value, is se urely erased. Note that this means that a session-state reveal after the session has
returned will produ e an empty output for the atta ker.
Mat hing sessions. We also use the following terminology: if in an exe ution of a ke proto ol
Pi has a session with input (Pi ; Pj ; s; role) and party Pj has a session with input (Pj ; Pi ; s0 ; role0 ),
and s = s0 then we say that the two sessions are mat hing. (Note that we do not require that
role =6 role0.) We all Pi and Pj the partners of session s. (Note that Pi may have ompleted a
session with partner Pj , while Pj may never omplete the mat hing session; ompletion of sessions
depends on the delivery of the proto ol's message whi h is subje t to adversarial ontrol.)
Session expiration: an extension to the um. The adversarial a tions against a ke proto ol
in the um are essentially the same as the generi um atta ker des ribed above, in luding party
 orruption, session-state reveals, and session-output queries. For larity, we will use the term
session-key query instead of session-output query when referring to ke sessions (namely, a session-
key query on a ompleted session provides the atta ker with the value of that session key, the only
se ret output of a ke session). We add, however, one more element to this model. We will onsider
a proto ol a tion alled session expiration. A session expiration a tion an be s heduled by the
atta ker for any ompleted session (Pi ; Pj ; s; role) within party Pi . The e e t of this a tivity is that
the se ret output of the session, i.e. the session key, is erased from the party's memory. In addition,
a spe ial note re ording the session expiration is added to Pi 's lo al output, and this ke-session is
labeled expired, with the following onsequen es. Adversary U is not allowed to perform a session-
key query for an expired session. In addition, when U orrupts a party, it does not see the lo al
outputs of the expired sessions (thus, upon party orruption the atta ker learns the party's session-
keys for unexpired sessions only.) As explained in Se tion 2 expiration of sessions is motivated by
the ommon pra ti e to limit the life time of session keys and, in parti ular, is instrumental for
 apturing the notion of perfe t forward se re y. Figure 1 needs to be updated by adding the session
expiration a tivity to the list of possible a tivities in Step 2.
Exposed sessions. Finally we introdu e the following terminology. A ke-session (Pi ; Pj ; s; role)
within Pi is alled lo ally exposed (within Pi ) if the atta ker performed any of the following a tions

                                                     11
on said session: (i) a session-state reveal; (ii) a session-key query; (iii) orruption of Pi before
session (Pi ; Pj ; s; role) expired within Pi (this in ludes the ase in whi h Pi is orrupted before the
session is even invoked or ompleted).
A ke-session is alled exposed if it is lo ally exposed or it has a mat hing session that is lo ally
exposed. A session whi h is not exposed is alled unexposed.

3.4 The am Model and Authenti ators
The material in this Se tion is taken from [2℄.
The authenti ated-links adversarial model (am). The authenti ated-links model of ompu-
tation is identi al to the unauthenti ated-links one, with the following fundamental ex eption. The
am-adversary, denoted A, an a tivate parties only with in oming messages that were generated
and sent by other parties in the proto ol. That is, the atta ker annot inje t or modify messages
(ex ept if the spe i ed sender is a orrupted party or if the message belongs to an exposed session).
In addition, any message may be delivered at most on e. (Namely, A may de ide not to deliver a
message at all, but if A delivers a message m then it an do so only to the proper destination of
m, only on e, and without hanging m or the spe i ed sender.)
    We de ne auth;A analogously to unauth;U , where the omputation is arried out in the
unauthenti ated-links model.
Emulation of proto ols. Central to the methodology of [2℄ and the urrent paper is the on ept
of \proto ol translation", espe ially between the am to the um. We want to be able to start with
any proto ol  that has some guaranteed fun tionality (or se urity) in the am and generate out
of it a proto ol 0 with equivalent fun tionality in the um. For this we rst need to formalize the
notion of \equivalen e". This is done in the next de nition from [2℄ (and whi h follows a general
approa h used for de ning se ure multi-party proto ols [23, 38, 1, 13℄).

De nition 1 Let  and 0 be an n-party message-driven proto ols. We say that 0 emulates  in
the unauthenti ated-links model if for any um-adversary U there exists an am-adversary A su h that
auth;A and unauth0 ;U are omputationally indistinguishable.


    Armed with the emulation de nition we an turn to de ne what is meant by \proto ol transla-
tion" from am to um. This is done in the next de nition [2℄ in terms of \ ompilers" and \authen-
ti ators".

De nition 2 A ompiler C is an algorithm that takes for input des riptions of proto ols and outputs
des riptions of proto ols. An authenti ator is a ompiler C where for any proto ol , the proto ol
C () emulates  in the unauthenti ated-links model.
Constru ting authenti ators: the mt proto ol. Thus, an authenti ator an take for input
proto ols designed for ideally authenti ated links (am), and turn them into `equivalent' proto ols for
adversary- ontrolled unauthenti ated links (um). But an su h authenti ators be onstru ted? The
answer is yes. The following methodology for onstru ting authenti ators is used in [2℄. Consider
the following simple proto ol, alled the message transmission (mt) proto ol. The proto ol takes
empty input. Upon a tivation within Pi on a tion request send(Pi ; Pj ; m), party Pi sends the
message (Pi ; Pj ; m) to party Pj , and outputs ``Pi sent m to Pj ''. Upon re eipt of a message
(Pi ; Pj ; m), Pj outputs ``Pj re eived m from Pi ''. When run in the am this proto ol represents
a perfe tly authenti ated message transmission proto ol. Now, let  be a proto ol that emulates mt

                                                  12
in unauthenti ated networks. We all su h proto ols mt-authenti ators and we will see that they
 an be onstru ted eÆ iently. On the basis of , de ne a ompiler C that on input a proto ol
 produ es a proto ol 0 = C () de ned as follows. When 0 is a tivated at a party Pi it rst
invokes . Then, for ea h message sent in proto ol , proto ol 0 a tivates  with the a tion request
for sending the same message to the same spe i ed re ipient. Whenever 0 is a tivated with some
in oming message, it a tivates  with the same in oming message. When  outputs ``Pi re eived
m from Pj '', proto ol  is a tivated with in oming message m from Pj . It is shown:
Theorem 3 ([2℄) Let  be an mt-authenti ator. Then C is an authenti ator.
    Thus, in order to see that authenti ators an be onstru ted it suÆ es to show onstru tions
of mt-authenti ators. This is done in [2℄ where several su h s hemes are shown based on di erent
 ryptographi fun tions (su h as digital signatures and en ryption).
    In Se tion 6.2 we extend the mt proto ol to a setting of multiple on urrent sessions. We all
the resultant proto ol smt. It is straightforward to extend the proof of the above theorem to over
the ase of smt-authenti ators as well.

4    Session-Key Se urity

After having de ned the basi formal model for key-ex hange proto ols and adversarial apabilities,
we pro eed to de ne what is meant for a key-ex hange proto ol to be se ure. While the previous
se tions were largely based on the work of [2℄, our de nition of se urity losely follows the de nitional
approa h of [7℄. The resultant notion of se urity, that we all session-key se urity (or SK-se urity),
fo uses on ensuring the se urity of individual session-keys as long as the session-key value is not
obtained by the atta ker via an expli it key exposure (i.e. as long as the session is unexposed { see
the terminology in the previous se tion). We want to apture the idea that the atta ker \does not
learn anything about the value of the key" from intera ting with the key-ex hange proto ol and
atta king other sessions and parties. As it is standard in the semanti -se urity approa h this is
formalized via the infeasibility to distinguish between the real value of the key and an independent
random value.
    We stress that this formulation of SK-se urity is very areful about tuning the de nition to
o er enough strength as required for the use of key-ex hange proto ols to realize se ure hannels
(Se tion 6), as well as being realisti enough to avoid over-kill requirements whi h would prevent
us from proving the se urity of very useful proto ols (Se tion 5). We further dis uss these aspe ts
after the presentation of the de nition.

4.1 De nition of SK-Se urity
We rst present the de nition for the um. The formalization in the am is analogous. We start by
de ning an \experiment" where the atta ker U hooses a session in whi h to be \tested" about
information it learned on the session-key; spe i ally, we will ask the atta ker to di erentiate the
real value of the hosen session key from a random value. (Note that this experiment is an artifa t
of the de nition of se urity, and not an integral part of the a tual key-ex hange proto ols and
adversarial intervention.)
    For the sake of this experiment we extend the usual apabilities of the adversary, U , in the
um by allowing it to perform a test-session query. That is, in addition to the regular a tions of U
against a key-ex hange proto ol , we let U to hoose, at any time during its run, a test-session

                                                  13
among the sessions that are ompleted, unexpired and unexposed at the time. Let  be the value of
the orresponding session-key. We toss a oin b, b R f0; 1g. If b = 0 we provide U with the value .
Otherwise we provide U with a value r randomly hosen from the probability distribution of keys
generated by proto ol . The atta ker U is now allowed to ontinue with the regular a tions of a
um-adversary but is not allowed to expose the test-session (namely, it is not allowed session-state
reveals, session-key queries, or partner's orruption on the test-session or its mat hing session.6 )
At the end of its run, U outputs a bit b0 (as its guess for b).
We will refer to an atta ker that is allowed test-session queries as a ke-adversary.

De nition 4 A ke proto ol  is alled SK-se ure if the following properties hold for any ke-
adversary U in the um.
   1. Proto ol  satis es the property that if two un orrupted parties omplete mat hing sessions
      then they both output the same key; and
   2. the probability that U guesses orre tly the bit b (i.e., outputs b0 = b) is no more than 1/2 plus
      a negligible fra tion in the se urity parameter.
If the above properties are satis ed for all ke-adversaries in the am then we say that  is SK-se ure
in the am.

    The rst ondition is a \ onsisten y" requirement for sessions ompleted by two un orrupted
parties. We have no requirement on the session-key value of a session where one of the partners
was orrupted before the session ompleted { in fa t, most ke proto ols allow a orrupted party to
strongly in uen e the ex hanged key. The se ond ondition is the \ ore property" for SK-se urity.
We note that the term `negligible' refers, as ustomary, to any fun tion (in the se urity parameter)
that diminishes asymptoti ally faster than any polynomial fra tion. (This formulation allows, if
so desired, to quantify se urity via a on rete se urity treatment. In this ase one quanti es the
atta ker's power via spe i bounds on omputation time, number of orruptions, et ., while its
advantage is bounded through a spe i parameter ".)
Remark. We highlight three aspe ts of De nition 4.
     The atta ker an keep running and atta king the proto ol even after re eiving the response
       (either real or random) to its test-session query. This ability (whi h represents a substantial
       strengthening of se urity relative to [7℄, see also [6℄) is essential for proving the main property
       of SK-se urity shown in this paper, namely its guarantee of se urity when used to generate
       se ure hannels as des ribed in Se tion 6. See the Appendix for histori ba kground on, as
       well as some te hni al rationale for this requirement.
     The atta ker is not allowed to orrupt partners to the test-session or issue any other exposure
        ommand against that session while unexpired. This re e ts the fa t that there is no way
       to guarantee the se ure use of a session-key that was exposed via an atta ker's break-in
       (or ryptanalysis). In parti ular, this restri tion is instrumental for proving the se urity of
       spe i important proto ols (e.g., DiÆe-Hellman key ex hange) as done in Se tion 5.
   6
     We stress, however, that the atta ker is allowed to orrupt a partner to the test-session as soon as the test-session
(or its mat hing session) expires at that party. See the dis ussion below. This may be the ase even if the other
partner has not yet expired the mat hing session or not even ompleted it.



                                                           14
    The above restri tion on the atta ker by whi h it annot orrupt a partner to the test-session
     is lifted as soon as the session expires at that partner. In this ase the atta ker should remain
     unable to distinguish between the real value of the key from a random value. This is the basis
     to the guarantee of \perfe t forward se re y" provided by our de nition and further dis ussed
     in Se tion 4.2.
    We stress that in spite of its \ ompa t" formulation De nition 4 is very powerful and an be
shown to ensure many spe i properties that are required from a good key-ex hange proto ol (see,
for example, hapter 12 of [37℄). Some of these properties in lude the guarantee that session-keys
belong to the right probability distribution of keys (ex ept if one of the partners is orrupted at
time of ex hange), the \authenti ity" of the ex hange (namely, a orre t and onsistent binding
between keys and parties' identities), resistan e to man-in-the-middle atta ks (for proto ols proven
SK-se ure in the um), resistan e to known-key atta ks, forward se re y, and more. However, we
note that all these properties (whi h are sometimes listed as a repla ement to a formal de nition
of se urity) in ombination do not suÆ e to guarantee the most important aspe t of key-ex hange
se urity that SK-se urity enjoys: namely, the omposition of the key-ex hange proto ols with
 ryptographi fun tions to enable se ure hannels (e.g., the original de nition of se urity in [7℄
does satisfy the above list of properties but is insuÆ ient to guarantee se ure hannels).
    We nally remark that De nition 4 makes se urity requirements from a ke proto ol only in ase
that the proto ol ompletes ke-sessions. No guarantee is made that ke-sessions will ever return,
or that they will not be aborted, i.e., that the orresponding session key will not be null. (In fa t,
a ke proto ol where all ke-sessions \hang" and never return satis es the de nition.) One an
add an expli it termination requirement for sessions in whi h the parties are un orrupted and all
messages are orre tly delivered by the atta ker. For simpli ity, we hoose to leave the analysis of
the termination properties of proto ols out of the s ope of the de nition of se urity.

4.2 Forward Se re y
Informally, the notion of \perfe t forward se re y" (pfs) [26, 19℄ is stated as the property that
\ ompromise of long-term keys does not ompromise past session keys". In terms of our formalism
this means that even if a party is orrupted (in whi h ase all its stored se rets { short-term and
long-term { be ome known to the atta ker) then nothing is learned about sessions within that party
that were previously unexposed and expired before the party orruption happened.
    The provision that expired session-keys remain indistinguishable from random values even if a
partner to that session is orrupted guarantees the perfe t forward se re y of SK-se ure proto ols.
Put in other words, when proving a proto ol to be SK-se ure using De nition 4 one automati ally
gets a proof that that proto ol guarantees pfs.
    On the other hand, while pfs is a very important se urity property it is not required for
all appli ation s enarios, e.g., when only authenti ation is required, or when short-term se re y
suÆ es. Indeed, it is ommon to nd in pra ti e proto ols that do not provide pfs and still are
not onsidered inse ure. One su h typi al ase are \key-transport proto ols" in whi h publi key
en ryption is used to ommuni ate a session-key from one party to another. (In this ase, even
if session-keys are erased from memory when no longer required, the orruption of a party may
allow an atta ker to ompute, via the dis overed long-term private keys, all the past session-keys.)
Due to the importan e of su h proto ols (they are ommonly used in, e.g., SSL), and given that
a hieving pfs usually has a non-negligible omputational ost, we de ne a notion of \SK-se urity
without pfs" by simply disallowing the proto ol's a tion of key expiration. That is, under this

                                                 15
modi ed model, session-keys never expire. This results in a weaker notion of se urity sin e now by
virtue of De nition 4 the atta ker is never allowed to orrupt a partner to the test-session (or in
other words, this weaker de nition of se urity does not guarantee the se urity of a session-key for
whi h one of the partners is ever orrupted).

De nition 5 We say that a ke proto ol satis es SK-se urity without pfs if it enjoys SK-se urity
relative to any ke-adversary in the um that is not allowed to expire keys. (Similarly, if the above
holds for any su h adversaries in the am then we say that  is SK-se ure without pfs in the am.)

Se tion 5.3 des ribes a proto ol that satis es SK-se urity without pfs but not regular SK-se urity.

5    SK-Se ure Proto ols

This se tion demonstrates the usability of our de nition of SK-se urity for proving the se urity of
some simple and important key-ex hange proto ols. One is the original DiÆe-Hellman proto ol, the
other is a simple \key transport" proto ol based on publi -key en ryption. We rst show that these
proto ols are se ure in the simpler authenti ated-links model (am). Then, using the methodology
from [2℄ we an apply to these proto ols a variety of (symmetri or asymmetri ) authenti ation
te hniques to obtain key-ex hange proto ols that are se ure in the realisti um model. Namely,
applying any mt-authenti ator (see Se tions 2.3 and 3.4) to the messages of the am-proto ol results
in a se ure ke proto ol in the um. The next Theorem states that this methodology does work for
our purposes.

Theorem 6 Let  be a SK-se ure key-ex hange proto ol in the am with pfs (resp., without pfs)
and let  be an mt-authenti ator. Then 0 = C () is a SK-se ure key-ex hange proto ol in the
um with pfs (resp., without pfs).


We remark that the following proof is somewhat more general, and proves that any authenti ator
(not only mt-authenti ators) is suÆ ient for proving the theorem.
Proof: We start by noting that the theorem's statement does not follow dire tly from the results of
[2℄ (spe i ally from Theorem 3 in that paper) sin e there the guarantee for se ure transformation
between models is proven for the basi um and am. Here we need to extend the proof to apture the
additional test-session queries that we allow the ke-adversary against the ke proto ol. Also worth
noting is that our um and am are ri her than the ones in [2℄ (e.g. they in lude session expiration
and session-state reveals), however it is easy to see that the proof of Theorem 3 in [2℄ will work for
these adversary a tivities as well.
    Based on these fa ts we pro eed to prove that if proto ol  satis es SK-se urity (De nition 4)
in the am then proto ol 0 = C () satis es that de nition in the um. We note that the proof
is the same for the ases of SK-se urity with or without pfs. Consider a proto ol  that satis es
De nition 4 in the am, and let U be a ke-adversary against 0 in the um. We rst observe that 0
satis es Requirement 1 of De nition 4 in the um with respe t to U (otherwise the global output of
running 0 in the um with U is easily distinguishable from the global output of running  in the
am with any am ke-adversary, in ontradi tion to the fa t that C is an authenti ator).
    Next we on entrate on demonstrating that 0 satis es Requirement 2 of De nition 4 in the
um. Spe i ally, given a ke-adversary U that guesses the bit b in the game of De nition 4 in the
um with probability 1=2 + , we onstru t a ke-adversary A that guesses the bit b in the game of



                                                 16
De nition 4 in the am with probability 1=2 + 0 , where 0 is polynomial in  and in the se urity
parameter.
   The onstru tion of A pro eeds in few steps, as follows:
  1. Given U , we rst onstru t a regular um-adversary U 0 against 0 (i.e., U 0 is not allowed to
     make test-session queries). Adversary U 0 runs adversary U and follows its instru tions, with
     the following ex eption: When U hooses a test-session s, U 0 queries session s and hooses
     b R f0; 1g. If b = 0 then U 0 hands the key of session s to U . If b = 1 then U 0 hands U a value
     drawn from the distribution of session keys. Next, U 0 returns to following the instru tions of
     U . When U halts, U 0 outputs the trans ript of its intera tion with U and halts.
  2. Sin e 0 = C (), we have that there exists an adversary, A0 in the am whose output is
     indistinguishable from the output of U 0 .
  3. Given adversary A0 , we onstru t the ke-adversary A promised above. Re all that A intera ts
     in the am with the game of De nition 4. A starts by hoosing a session s at random out of
     the sessions initiated by A0 . Next, A follows the instru tions of A0 ; when the hosen session
     s is established, A announ es s to be its test session. In addition, if A0 queries session s (and
     session s is not yet exposed) then A feeds the obtained value for the key of session s to A0 .
     Next A returns to following the instru tions of A0 . When A0 halts, A inspe ts the output of
     A0. Re all that the output of A0 mimi s the output of U 0, whi h in turn des ribes a trans ript
     of an exe ution of U . If in that trans ript of U the test session is session s then A outputs
     the bit b0 that U outputs in that trans ript. Otherwise, A outputs a randomly hosen bit.
We analyze the su ess probability of A under the assumption that the output of A0 and U 0 are
identi ally distributed. A ounting for the fa t that the two outputs are only omputationally
indistinguishable is done in standard ways.
    Let ` be an upper bound on the number of sessions invoked by U , the advantage (i.e., the
probability of su ess over 1=2) of A is 1=` times its advantage onditioned on the event that the
test session hosen by U (in the output of A0 ) equals s. For the rest of the analysis we assume that
the test session hosen by U (in the output of A0 ) equals s.
    Let pb denote the probability that U outputs 1 when intera ting with the game of De nition 4
in the um, when the value of the \real or random" bit is b. We have that jpreal prandomj  . Also,
when run within U 0 , U outputs 1 with probability (preal + prandom)=2. Consider the following ases:
  1. Assume that A is given the \real" key of the test session s. In this ase, the view of U
     (within the output of A0 that is run inside A) is distributed identi ally to its view when U 0
     intera ts with 0 in the um. In this ase U (and thus also A) outputs 1 with probability
     (preal + prandom )=2.
  2. Assume that A is given the \random" value for the key of the test session s. In this ase,
     the view of U (within the output of A0 that is run inside A) is distributed identi ally to its
     view when intera ting in the game of De nition 4 in the um, onditioned on the event that
     it is given a \random" value for the key of the test session. In this ase U (and thus also A)
     outputs 1 with probability prandom.
It follows that, when A0 perfe tly simulates U 0 , the advantage of A is =2`.                      2


                                                 17
5.1 Two-move DiÆe-Hellman in the am
We demonstrate that under the De isional DiÆe-Hellman (DDH) assumption (see below) the ` las-
si ' two-move DiÆe-Hellman key-ex hange proto ol designed to work against eavesdroppers-only is
SK-se ure in the am. We denote this proto ol by 2dh and des ribe it in Figure 2 (here and in the
sequel all exponentiations are modulo the de ned prime p).
Using Theorem 6 we an apply any authenti ator to this proto ol to obtain a se ure DiÆe-Hellman
ex hange against realisti um atta kers. For illustration, a parti ular instan e of su h a SK-se ure
proto ol in the um, using digital signatures for authenti ation, is shown in the next se tion. Other
  avors of authenti ated DH proto ols an be derived in a similar way by using other authenti ators
(e.g. based on publi key en ryption or on pre-shared keys [2℄); see Se tion 5.4.

                                                Proto ol 2dh


   Common information: Primes p; q , q=p 1, and g of order q in Zp .
   Step 1:   The initiator, Pi , on input (Pi ; Pj ; s), hooses x R Zq and sends (Pi ; s; = g x ) to Pj .
   Step 2:  Upon re eipt of (Pi ; s; ) the responder, Pj , hooses y R Zq , sends (Pj ; s; = g y ) to Pi ,
         erases y , and outputs the session key = y under session-id s.
   Step 3:  Upon re eipt of (Pj ; s; ), party Pi omputes        0 =   x , erases x, and outputs the session
         key 0 under session-id s.

                     Figure 2: The two-move DiÆe-Hellman proto ol in the am


The De isional DiÆe-Hellman (DDH) assumption is as follows.

Assumption 7 Let k be a se urity parameter. Let p; q be primes, where q is of length k bits
and q=p 1, and g be of order q in Zp . Then the probability distributions of quintuples Q0 =
fhp; g; gx ; gy ; gxy i : x; y R Zq g and Q1 = fhp; g; gx ; gy ; gz i : x; y; z R Zq g are omputationally
indistinguishable.
Theorem 8 Assuming the De isional DiÆe-Hellman (DDH) assumption, proto ol 2dh is SK-
se ure in the am.
Proof: To see that the rst requirement of De nition 4 is satis ed, note that if both Pi and Pj
are un orrupted during the ex hange of the key and both omplete the proto ol (i.e. the three
steps of the proto ol are ompleted by Pi and Pj ) then they both establish the same key (whi h is
  = 0 = gxy mod p). Note that the session identi er s uniquely binds the values of gx and gy to
these parti ular mat hing sessions and di erentiates them from other exponentials that the parties
may ex hange in other (possibly simultaneous) sessions.
    We show that the se ond requirement of De nition 4 is also satis ed by proto ol 2dh. Assume
to the ontrary that there is a ke-adversary A in the am against proto ol 2dh that has a non-
negligible advantage in guessing orre tly whether the response to a test-query is real or random.
Out of this atta ker A, we onstru t an algorithm D that distinguishes between the distributions
Q0 and Q1 with non-negligible probability; thus rea hing a ontradi tion with Assumption 7. The
input to D is denoted by (p; g;  ;  ;  ) and is hosen from Q0 or Q1 ea h with probability 1/2.

                                                       18
Let ` be an upper bound on the number of sessions invoked by A in any intera tion. Algorithm D
uses adversary A as a subroutine and is des ribed in Figure 3.

                                              Distinguisher   D
   Pro eed as follows, on input (p; g;  ;  ;  ):
      1. Choose r R f1 : : : `g.
      2. Invoke A, on a simulated intera tion in the am with parties P1 ; :::; Pn running 2dh. Hand A
         the values p; g as the publi parameters for the proto ol exe ution.
      3. Whenever A a tivates a party to establish a new session (ex ept for the r-th session) or to
         re eive a message, follow the instru tions of 2dh on behalf of that party. When a session is
         expired at a player erase the orresponding session key from that player's memory. When
         a party is orrupted or a session (other than the r-th session) is exposed, hand A all the
         information orresponding to that party or session as in a real intera tion.
      4. When the r-th session, say (Pi ; Pj ; s), is invoked within Pi to ex hange a key with Pj , let Pi
         send the message (Pi ; s;  ) to Pj .
      5. When Pj is invoked to re eive (Pi ; s;  ), let Pj send the message (Pj ; s;  ) to Pi .
      6. If session (Pi ; Pj ; s) is hosen by A as the test-session, then provide A with    as the answer
         to this query.
      7. If the r-th session (Pi ; Pj ; s) is ever exposed, or if a session di erent than the r-th session
         is hosen as the test-session, or if A halts without hoosing a test-session then D outputs
         b0 R f0; 1g and halts.
      8. If A halts and outputs a bit b0 , then D halts and outputs b0 too.

                              Figure 3: Building a distinguisher for DDH


    First note that the run of A by D (up to the point where A stops or D aborts A's run) is
identi al to a normal run of A against proto ol 2dh.
    Consider the ase in whi h the test session s hosen by A oin ides with the session hosen at
random by D (i.e., the r-th session as hosen in Step 1). In this ase, the response to the test-query
by A is  . Thus, if the input to D ame from Q0 then the response was the a tual value of the
key ex hanged between Pi and Pj during the test-session s (sin e, by onstru tion, the session key
ex hanged in Steps 4 and 5 of Figure 3 is  = gxy ). On the other hand, if the input to D ame
from Q1 then the response to the test query was a random exponentiation, i.e. a random value from
the distribution of keys generated by the proto ol. In addition, the input to D was hosen with
probability 1/2 from Q0 and with probability 1/2 from Q1 and then the distribution of responses
provided by D to the test query of A is the same as spe i ed by De nition 4. In this ase, the
probability that A guesses orre tly whether the test value was \real" or \random" is 1=2 + " for
non-negligible ". By the above argument this is equivalent to guessing whether the input to the
distinguisher D ame from Q0 or Q1 , respe tively. Thus, by outputting the same bit as A we get
that the distinguisher D guesses orre tly the input distribution Q0 or Q1 with the same probability
1=2 + " as A did.
    Now onsider the ase in whi h the r-th session is not hosen as a test-session. In this ase
D always ends outputting a random bit, and thus its probability to guess orre tly the input
                                                      19
distribution is 1/2.
    Sin e the rst ase (in whi h the test-session and the r-th session oin ide) happens with
probability 1=` while the other ase happens with probability 1 1=` we get that the overall
probability of D to guess orre tly is 1=2 + "=`, and thus D su eeds in distinguishing Q0 from Q1
with non-negligible advantage.
                                                                                                                     2
5.2 SK-se ure DiÆe-Hellman Proto ol in the um
Here we apply the signature-based authenti ator of [2℄ to the proto ol 2dh from Figure 2 to obtain
a DiÆe-Hellman key-ex hange that is SK-se ure in the um. We present the resultant proto ol in
Figure 4 (it is very similar to a proto ol spe i ed in [29℄). Its SK-se urity follows from Theorems
6 and 8.

                                                Proto ol sig-dh


   Initial information: Primes p; q , q=p 1, and g of order q in Zp . Ea h player has a private key for a
   signature algorithm sig, and all have the publi veri ation keys of the other players.
   Step 1:   The initiator, Pi , on input (Pi ; Pj ; s), hooses x R Zq and sends (Pi ; s; = g x ) to Pj .
   Step 2:  Upon re eipt of (Pi ; s; ) the responder, Pj , hooses y R Zq , and sends to Pi the message
         (Pj ; s; = g y ) together with its signature sigj (Pj ; s; ; ; Pi ); it also omputes the session key
           = y and erases y .
   Step 3:   Upon re eipt of (Pj ; s; ) and Pj 's signature, party Pi veri es the signature and the or-
         re tness of the values in luded in the signature (su h as players identities, session id, the
         value of exponentials, et .). If the veri ation su eeds then Pi sends to Pj the message
         (Pi ; s; sigi (Pi ; s; ; ; Pj )), omputes 0 = x , erases x, and outputs the session key 0 under
         session-id s.
   Step 4:   Upon re eipt of the triple (Pi ; s; sig ), Pj veri es Pi 's signature sig and the values it in ludes.
         If the he k su eeds it outputs the session key under session-id s.

             Figure 4: DiÆe-Hellman proto ol in the um: authenti ation via signatures.


Remarks on proto ol sig-dh.            The proto ol is the result of applying the signature-based
authenti ator of [2℄ to ea h of the ows in the 2-pass DiÆe-Hellman proto ol 2dh of Figure 2,
and joining (piggy-ba king) the ommon ows. The authenti ators use the values and (the
DH exponentials) as the hallenges required by these authenti ators. This assumes (as spe i ed
in proto ol 2dh) that these exponentials are hosen afresh for ea h new ex hange. We remark
that this dual use of and as exponentials and as hallenges is done to simplify the proto ol but
separate hallenges ould be sent by the parties and in luded under the signature. It is worth noting
that the identity of the destination party in luded under the signatures is part of the spe i ation
of the signature-based authenti ator of [2℄ and is fundamental for the se urity of proto ol sig-dh
(without them the proto ol is inse ure; see [19℄).
The des ription of sig-dh in Figure 4 assumes, as formalized in our model, that the value s of
the session-id is provided to the parties. In pra ti e, one usually generates the session identi er
s as a pair (s1 ; s2 ) where s1 is a value hosen by Pi and di erent (with very high probability)

                                                        20
from all other su h values hosen by Pi in his other sessions with Pj . Similarly, s2 is hosen by Pj
with an analogous uniqueness property. These values s1 ; s2 an be ex hanged by the parties as a
prologue to the above proto ol (this may be the ase of proto ols that implement su h a prologue
to ex hange some other system information and to negotiate ex hange parameters; see for example
[28℄). Alternatively, s1 an be in luded by Pi in the rst message of sig-dh, and s2 be in luded by
Pj in the se ond message. In any ase, it is important for the se urity of the proto ol that these
values be in luded under the parties' signatures.

5.3 A publi -key en ryption-based proto ol without pfs
The proto ol des ribed in this se tion is based on publi key en ryption s hemes se ure against
 hosen iphertext atta ks. We show that this proto ol satis es De nition 5, i.e. SK-se urity
without pfs, in the am. That is, the proto ol does not provide forward se re y of the session keys
(an atta ker who breaks into a party may ompromise all the keys ex hanged by this party in the
past even if these keys are erased from that party's memory). Formally, we onsider that session
keys never expire. The proto ol an be made into a SK-se ure without pfs proto ol in the um by
using any authenti ator (Theorem 6).
    Let (G; E; D) be a key-generation, en ryption and de ryption algorithms, respe tively, of a
publi -key en ryption s heme se ure against hosen iphertext atta ks (CCA). (See, for instan e,
[20, 4, 17℄). Let k be the se urity parameter. Assume that ea h party Pi has invoked G(k) to get
a pair (ei ; di ) of en ryption and de ryption keys, and all parties have the publi en ryption key ei
of the other parties. In addition, let ffg2f0;1gk be a pseudorandom fun tion family (as in [22℄).
The proto ol, denoted en , is des ribed in Figure 5.

                                               Proto ol en


   Pro eed as follows, given se urity parameter k .
   Step 1: The initiator, Pi , on input (Pi ; Pj ; s), hooses  R f0; 1gk and sends (Pi ; s; Eej ()) to Pj .
         Next, Pi outputs the session key  = f (Pi ; Pj ; s) under session-id s.
   Step 2:  Upon re eipt of (Pi ; s; ) the responder, Pj , omputes 0 = Ddj ( ). If the de ryption
         algorithm does not reje t the iphertext, then Pj outputs the session key  0 = f (Pi ; Pj ; s)
                                                                                                 0

         under session-id s.

                     Figure 5: A ke proto ol based on CCA-se ure en ryption.


Remark.         For ensuring the se urity of proto ol en we need to assume that the de ryption
operation 0 = Ddj ( ) (in luding the validity he k for the iphertext ) and the omputation
of the pseudorandom value f0 (Pi ; Pj ; s) in Step 2 are performed su h that neither the long-term
de ryption key dj or the temporary value 0 appear as part of the state of session s. Namely, we
need to assume that these operations are done in a separate se ure module and only the value
0 = f0 (Pi ; Pj ; s) is returned to the session state. The assumption that long-term private keys are
not part of the session state is a fundamental requirement in a model as ours that di erentiates
session-state orruptions from total orruptions (see Se tion 2.2). The need to hide 0 from the
session state is a spe i requirement of the en proto ol and it is illustrated by the following atta k.
Say that 0 is returned to the session state, then an atta ker ould ompromise an unexposed session

                                                      21
(Pi ; Pj ; s) as follows. It orrupts party Pl ; l 6= i; j , and initiates an en session (Pl ; Pj ; s0 ) between
the orrupted Pl and Pj in whi h Pl sends to Pj the same iphertext sent in session s from Pi to
Pj . On e Pj de rypts and stores the temporary value 0 in the state of session s0 , the atta ker
performs a session-state reveal and learns 0 . Now it an also ompute the value of the session
key orresponding to the unexposed session s. Thus, this atta k (and the proof of Theorem 9)
show the are needed in spe ifying and implementing the en proto ol if we require resistan e to
session-state reveals. Whether this is a realisti risk or not may depend on parti ular appli ations
and s enarios. In any ase, if a separate module for the above operations annot be assumed then
the proto ol be omes inse ure in our model but is still se ure in a model where session states an
only be revealed via total orruptions (i.e., a weakened model where session-state reveals are not
 onsidered as a separate atta ker a tion).

Theorem 9 If the en ryption (G; E; D) is CCA-se ure and the family ff g2f0;1gk is pseudoran-
dom, then proto ol en is SK-se ure without pfs in the authenti ated links model (am).

Proof: It is easy to see that the rst ondition of De nition 4 is satis ed by proto ol en (that
is, un orrupted parties that omplete mat hing sessions output the same session-key). The ore of
the proof is in proving the se ond ondition of De nition 4 in the ase where keys are not expired.
    We start by de ning a \game" whi h aptures the hosen- iphertext se urity of the en ryption
fun tion E in ombination with the pseudorandom family ff g2f0;1gk . We will then show that an
atta ker that breaks the SK-se urity of proto ol en an also win in this game and then break the
en ryption fun tion E . The game is de ned in Figure 6.

                                          The en ryption game


    The parties to the game are G and B (for good and bad). G possesses a pair of publi and private
    keys, e and d (generated via the key generation algorithm G). B knows e but not d.
    The game pro eeds in phases:
    Phase 0:  G provides B with a hallenge iphertext  = Ee (0 ) for 0 R f0; 1gk .
    Phase 1: B sends a pair ( ; t) to G who responds with f (t) where  = Dd ( ). This is repeated
         a polynomial (in k ) number of times with ea h pair being hosen adaptively by B (i.e., after
         seeing G 's response to previous pairs).
    Phase 2: B sends a test string t to G . Then G hooses a random bit b       f0; 1g. If b = 0 then
                                                                           R

         G responds with f0 (t ) where 0 is the value en rypted by G in phase 0. If b = 1 then G
                                 
          responds with a random string r of the same length as f0 (t ).
    Phase 3:   Same as Phase 1.
    Phase 4:B outputs a bit b0 .
    And the winner is... B if and only if b = b .
                                               0



          Figure 6: A game that aptures the CCA-se urity of the en ryption fun tion E


    We state the following Lemma (the proof uses standard arguments and, in parti ular, is similar



                                                      22
to the proof of the en ryption-based authenti ator from [2℄).

Lemma 10 Assume that the en ryption s heme (G; E; D) is CCA-se ure and the family ff g2f0;1gk
is pseudorandom. Then if the pair (  ; t ) is not queried by B during Phases 1 and 3 the probability
that B wins in the above game is no more than 1/2 plus a negligible fra tion.
     We note that B is not allowed (in the lemma formulation) to query the pair (  ; t ) but it is
allowed to in lude, separately, the values  and t in other pairs.
     We now pro eed to show that if there is an am ke-atta ker A that breaks the SK-se urity of
proto ol en in the sense that it an distinguish between real and random values of a test session
while not being allowed to orrupt the partners to this session, then there is an eÆ ient algorithm
B that wins in the above game with non-negligible probability over 1/2.
     We build su h B. Let G be the party against whi h B plays the game. G holds a private
de ryption key d and publi en ryption key e. The game starts with G sending a hallenge iphertext
  to B. Then, B pro eeds to Phase 1 of the game doing the following. It builds a virtual s enario for
the run of proto ol en , and a tivates the atta ker A against this virtual run. Among all n parties
in this run, B hooses one at random, all it Pj . For all other virtual players B hooses private
keys (using the key generation algorithm G) and provides A with the orresponding publi keys.
B does not hoose a private key for Pj; instead it provides A with e (the publi key of G ) as the
publi key of Pj . Also, B hooses a random session among the sessions where Pj is the responder.
We denote this session as s , and its initiator as Pi (i.e. the hosen session is (Pi ; Pj ; s )).
     All operations s heduled by A are performed by B on behalf of the virtual players in the
following way. All session establishments are exe uted by B a ording to the proto ol ex ept for
the establishment of session s . When A s hedules the establishment of session s between Pi and
Pj , B sends the message (Pi ; s ;  ) to Pj on behalf of Pi . Here  is the hallenge iphertext
provided to B by G in Phase 0.
     All exposure of session keys performed by A, via session or party orruptions, that do not involve
Pj as the responder are answered by B using his knowledge of private keys. When A orrupts a
party other than Pj and Pi , then B also provides A with the private key of that party. If a session
s= 6 s between a player P and Pj in whi h the latter a ts as responder is exposed by A, then B
provides the value of that key to A in the following way. If P was un orrupted at the time that s
was established then B was the one to hoose the key  en rypted by P and then it knows it. If P
was orrupted then all B knows is the message (P; s; ) sent from P to Pj as step 1 in the proto ol.
In this ase B presents to G (as part of Phase 1) the pair ( ; t) where t = (P; Pj ; s). The value
 returned by G is the value that B provides to A as the queried session key (note that by our
assumption in the Remark pre eding the Theorem the only information exposed in a session-key
query or in session-state reveal is the value of the session key so no other information needs to be
returned by B to A).
     If at any point A queries or reveals session s , orrupts Pi or Pj , or hooses a test session
di erent than s , B pro eeds as follows. It aborts the run of A and moves to Phase 2 sending an
arbitrary value t to G . After getting G 's response it moves dire tly to Phase 4 outputting a random
bit b0 .
     If A de ides to be tested on session s then B moves to Phase 2 and sends to G the value
t = (Pi ; Pj ; s ). The response from G is passed by B to A as the value of the key for session s .
 
     B enters Phase 3. It keeps running A in the same way as des ribed for Phase 1 above (note
that in this ase A is not allowed to expose s ). When A outputs a bit b0 and stops, then B moves
to Phase 4 and outputs the same bit b0 as A did.

                                                  23
    We rst note that the above behavior of B in the game is a legal one, namely, that it never asks
the pair (  ; t ) from G in phases 1 and 3. This is easy to see sin e all pairs queried by B during
these phases ontain a value t di erent than t . Indeed all the values t queried by B have the form
of a triple (P; Q; s) where P; Q are player identities and s a session identi er. Thus, due to the
uniqueness of session-id's the value t = (Pi ; Pj ; s ) o urs only with relation to session s whi h
is never queried by B from G in phases 1 and 3.
    Now we prove that B wins the game against G with non-negligible advantage. First, note that
in the ases where B aborts the run of A before ompletion it outputs a random bit b0 so its han es
to win in this ase is exa tly 1/2. In the ase where A ends with output b0 the han es of B to win
are exa tly the same as those of A to guess orre tly whether the test value was real or random.
This probability is, by assumption, non-negligible over 1/2. The later ase happens whenever the
tested session hosen by A is the same s hosen (randomly) by B. Sin e this event happens with
non-negligible probability (1=` where ` is an upper bound on the number of sessions established in
the proto ol run) then the overall advantage of B is non-negligible.                                   2
Remarks on Proto ol en .
   1. The derivation of the session key via a pseudorandom fun tion applied to the session and
      parties' identi ers is of fundamental importan e for the se urity of the proto ol. Had the
      session key be just  then the proto ol would be inse ure (even in the am!). In this ase the
      atta ker sees that Pi sends the iphertext Eej () to Pj . Then party Pl , that we assume is
       ontrolled by the atta ker, sends the same iphertext to Pj . Now, Pj has established the same
      session-key with two di erent parties. This a serious se urity aw7 that breaks SK-se urity:
      the atta ker an now query Pj for the key ex hanged with Pl and in this way to learn the key
      that Pj ex hanged with Pi .
   2. The a tual se urity of proto ol en an be improved by spe ifying that sessions do expire
      at the initiator (and the orresponding keys removed from its memory). This preserves SK-
      se urity and adds onsiderably to the pra ti al se urity of the proto ol. For example, onsider
      an appli ation where the initiators are mobile devi es, vulnerable to the stealing of the private
      key, ommuni ating with a well-prote ted gateway. In this ase, if we let keys to expire at
      the initiator, then nding the de ryption key of su h a mobile devi e is of no help to the
      atta ker in re overing past (expired) session keys. The atta ker must break the gateway to
      obtain these keys.
   3. Another stronger version of this proto ol is obtained by letting ea h party send the other a
      key as in en and deriving the shared session key in a way that requires knowledge of both
      en rypted keys. In this ase, the proto ol still does not provide pfs but (if keys are erased
      from memory when the session is expired) the only way to re over a past key is to nd the
      private keys of both initiator and responder. This is the basis to the DH-less mode of SKEME
      [32℄. However, note that our de nition of SK-se urity (with pfs) would reje t su h a proto ol
      as se ure. A weakened version of the de nition that is satis ed by the proto ol is obtained if
      one requires that at most one of the partners to the modi ed session an be orrupted (and
      only after the key is expired at that party).
   7
   [19℄ des ribes an atta k in whi h a dishonest ustomer exploits a key-ex hange weakness to defraud a bank and a
honest ustomer; the same atta k an be mount here with Pj a ting as the bank, and Pi and Pl a ting as the honest
and heating ustomers, respe tively. See [19℄ for the details.




                                                       24
5.4 Proto ols based on shared keys
In order to further illustrate the usability of our methodology we show how to apply it to key-
ex hange proto ols that assume that the two peers initially share a se ret key and use this key
to authenti ate the ex hange of new key material. This \key refreshment" fun tionality is very
important in network se urity proto ols (e.g. [32, 28℄). We show examples of SK-se ure proto ols
with and without pfs.
   These examples use the following MAC-based authenti ator that assumes a shared key ij
between a pair of parties Pi ; Pj . Let f denote a se ure MAC fun tion, and ij be a random key for
f hosen under se urity parameter k. The authenti ator is de ned as follows: when Pi wants to
send a message to a re ipient Pj , the latter sends a hallenge r R f0; 1g2k to Pi , and Pi sends the
message m together with the authenti ation tag fij (Pj ; r; m). The se urity of this authenti ator
 an be proven in a way similar to the proof of the signature-based authenti ator from [2℄.
   Applying this authenti ator to the basi two-move DiÆe-Hellman proto ol 2dh in the am one
obtains (see Se tion 5.1) an SK-se ure DiÆe-Hellman proto ol (with pfs) in the um. We omit a
detailed des ription of the resultant proto ol and just point out that it is similar to proto ol sig-dh
from Se tion 5.2 where the digital signatures are repla ed with the appli ation (by Pi and Pj ) of
the MAC fun tion keyed under the shared key ij .


                                                Proto ol rekey


   Initial information: Ea h pair of players (Pi ; Pj ) share a se ret pseudorandom fun tion fij .
   Proto ol rekey in the am:

   Step 1:   The initiator, Pi , on input (Pi ; Pj ; s), hooses ri R f0; 1g2k and sends (Pi ; s; ri ) to Pj .
   Step 2:   Upon re eipt of (Pi ; s; ri ), the responder Pj hooses rj R f0; 1g2k and sends (Pj ; s; rj ) to
         Pi . Then, Pj outputs session key fij (ri ; rj )
   Step 3:   Upon re eipt of (Pj ; s; rj ), player Pi outputs session key fij (ri ; rj ).

   Proto ol rekey in the um:

   Step 0:   Both players derive two keys from ij : 1 = fij (1) and 2 = fij (2).
   Step 1:   The initiator, Pi , on input (Pi ; Pj ; s), hooses ri R f0; 1g2k and sends (Pi ; s; ri ) to Pj .
   Step 2:  Upon re eipt of (Pi ; s; ri ), the responder Pj hooses rj R f0; 1g2k , omputes
         tj = f1 (Pi ; ri ; s; rj ) and sends (Pj ; s; rj ; tj ) to Pi .
   Step 3:  Upon re eipt of (Pj ; s; rj ; tj ), player Pi veri es the authenti ation tag tj and if su essful
         it omputes ti = f1 (Pj ; rj ; s; ri ), sends (Pi ; s; ti ) to Pj , and outputs session key f2 (ri ; rj ).
   Step 4:  Upon re eipt of (Pi ; s; ti ), player Pj veri es the authenti ation tag ti and if su essful it
         outputs session key f2 (ri ; rj ).

   Figure 7: Key-refresh proto ol based on a shared se ret. The proto ol in the um is the
   result of applying the MAC-based authenti ator to the proto ol in the am


    We pro eed to show yet another example of the appli ation of our modular methodology for
designing and proving ke proto ols. In this ase we show a simple and eÆ ient proto ol to derive

                                                         25
a fresh session key between players Pi and Pj based on the ommon (\master") se ret key ij and
without the use of DiÆe-Hellman (the proto ol does not provide pfs). In Figure 7 we present
the proto ol in the am and the proto ol in the um where the latter is derived from the former by
applying the above based MAC-based authenti ator to ea h of the proto ol's messages and joining
(piggy-ba king) the ommon ows. We note that in this ase we use a pseudorandom family f
rather than a mere MAC for the implementation of the authenti ator.
    The SK-se urity (without pfs) of the am version of rekey follows dire tly from the properties
of pseudorandom fun tions. The SK-se urity (without pfs) of the se ond proto ol in the um is
the result of applying the MAC-based authenti ator to the rst proto ol. Note that we are using
f2 with the fun tionality of a pseudorandom fun tion as in the am proto ol, and f1 with the
fun tionality of a MAC for the implementation of the MAC-based authenti ator. As in the ase
of proto ol sig-dh, also here we are re-using the strings ri and rj both for key derivation and as
 hallenges for the authenti ator. We remark that the rekey proto ol in the um is similar to the
AKEP2 proto ol from [7℄.
    We end this se tion by remarking that another interesting use of our results is for analyz-
ing the password-based ke proto ols from [27℄. It is shown there how to build a password-based
authenti ator whi h is then used to authenti ate a DiÆe-Hellman ex hange.

6        Appli ations to Se ure Channels

It is ommon pra ti e to prote t end-to-end ommuni ations by letting the end parties ex hange
a se ret session key and then use this key to authenti ate and en rypt the transmitted data under
symmetri ryptographi fun tions. In order for a key-ex hange proto ol to be onsidered se ure it
needs to guarantee that the above strategy for se uring data works orre tly, namely, that by using
a shared key provided by the ke proto ol one a hieves sound authenti ation and se re y. As it is
 ustomary, we will refer to a link between a pair of parties that a hieves these properties as a se ure
 hannel. While se ure hannels may have di erent meanings in di erent ontexts, here we restri t
our treatment to the above setting of se uring ommuni ations using symmetri ryptography with
a key derived from a key-ex hange proto ol8 . We prove that an SK-se ure key-ex hange proto ol,
appropriately ombined with se ure MAC and symmetri en ryption fun tions, suÆ es for realizing
su h se ure hannels.

6.1 A Template Proto ol: Network Channels
We start by formalizing a \template proto ol" that aptures a generi session-oriented ke-based
proto ol for se ure hannels between pairs of parties in a multi-party setting with parties P1 ; : : : ; Pn .
This template proto ol, alled NetChan, simply aptures the me hanism by whi h two parties rst
share a se ret key and then use this key for se uring information they ex hange. In the template
proto ol this ex hange of information and the se urity fun tions applied to it are represented
through abstra t `send' and `re eive' fun tions. Later we will see spe i implementations of this
template proto ol where the generi `send' and `re eive' primitives are instantiated with a tual
fun tions (e.g., for providing authenti ation and/or en ryption). We will also de ne what it means
for su h an implementation to be \se ure".
De nition of NetChan. A (session-based) network hannels proto ol, NetChan(; snd; r v), is
de ned on the basis of a ke proto ol , and two generi fun tions snd and r v. (A more general
    8
        A somewhat di erent formalization of se ure hannels appears in [14℄ (see Appendix).


                                                          26
treatment an be obtained by onsidering these fun tions as intera tive proto ols but we leave this
more general approa h beyond the s ope of the present paper.) Both snd and r v are probabilisti
fun tions that take as arguments a session-key (we denote this key as a subs ript to the fun tion)
and a message m. The fun tions may also depend on additional state information su h as a session-
id and partner identi ers, a message identi er, et . The output of snd is a single value m0 , while
the output of r v is a pair (v; ok) where ok is a bit and v an arbitrary value. (The bit ok will be
used to return a veri ation value, e.g. the result of verifying an authenti ation tag.) On the basis
of su h fun tions we de ne NetChan(; snd; r v) in Figure 8.


                                       Proto ol NetChan    (; snd; r v)

   NetChan (; snd; r v) is initialized with the same initialization fun tion I of the ke proto ol  . It an
   then be invoked within a party Pi under the following a tivations:
      1. establish-session(Pi; Pj ; s; role): this triggers a ke-session under  within Pi with partner Pj ,
         session-id s and role 2 finitiator; responderg. If the ke-session ompletes Pi re ords in its lo al
         output \established session s with Pj " and stores the generated session key.
      2. expire-session(Pi ; Pj ; s): Pi marks session (Pi ; Pj ; s) (if it exists at Pi ) as expired and the
         session key is erased. Pi re ords in its lo al output \session s with Pj is expired".
      3. send(Pi ; Pj ; s; m): Pi he ks that session (Pi ; Pj ; s) has been ompleted and not expired, if so
         it omputes m0 = snd (m), using the orresponding session key , sends (Pi ; s; m0 ) to Pj , and
         re ords \sent message m to Pj within session s" in the lo al output.
      4. On in oming message (Pj ; s; m0 ), Pi he ks that the session (Pi ; Pj ; s) has been ompleted and
         not expired, if so it omputes (m; ok) = r v (m0 ) under the orresponding session key . If
         ok = 1 then Pi re ords \re eived message m from Pj within session s." If ok = 0 then
         no further a tion is taken.

                            Figure 8: A generi network hannels proto ol


    We emphasize that the above de nition of NetChan applies to either am or um adversarial
models; indeed, the atta ker against NetChan is allowed to initiate and s hedule any of the proto ol
a tivations and has all the apabilities of an atta ker in the orresponding model, in luding atta ks
against the key-ex hange proto ol  (su h as party orruptions, session-state reveal, and session-
key queries). Also for NetChan we keep our ke onvention that session identi ers are he ked for
uniqueness. Note that NetChan has no lo al outputs labeled `se ret' (in parti ular, the session key
is not part of the lo al output of NetChan as these keys are used internally and never passed to
another proto ol). Thus, the external fun tionality of NetChan is as in a simple (session-based)
message ex hange proto ol.

6.2 Network Authenti ation
On the basis of the above formalism, we treat the ase of network hannels that provide authenti-
 ation of information over adversary- ontrolled hannels. Namely, we are interested in a NetChan
proto ol that runs in the unauthenti ated-links model um and yet provides authenti ity of transmit-
ted messages. This implementation of NetChan (whi h we all NetAut) will be aimed at apturing
the pra ti e by whi h ommuni ating parties use a key-ex hange proto ol to establish a shared

                                                      27
session key, and use that key to authenti ate (via a message authenti ation fun tion, MAC) the
information ex hanged during that session. Namely, if Pi and Pj share a mat hing session s and Pi
wants to send a message m to Pj during that session then Pi transmits m together with MAC(m)
where  is the orresponding session key.
Proto ol NetAut . Let  be a ke proto ol and let f be a MAC fun tion. Proto ol NetAut(; f )
is a network hannels proto ol NetChan(; snd; r v) as de ned in Figure 8, where fun tions snd and
r v are de ned as:

    On input m, snd(m) produ es output m0 = (m; f(m)).
    On input m0, r v(m0) outputs (v; ok) as follows. If m0 is of the form (m; t) then ok = 1 if
     and only if (i) m is di erent than all previously seen messages in the session, and (ii) (m; t)
     passes the veri ation fun tion of f under key . If ok = 1 then set v = m, otherwise ok = 0
     and v = null.
Note that we require the re eiver of a message to he k for uniqueness of the in oming message. This
 he k is needed to avoid \re-play" or dupli ation of delivered messages by an atta ker. Equivalently,
one an think of m as the on atenation of the message with a unique per-message identi er whi h
is omputed by the sender and he ked for uniqueness at the re eiver (e.g., based on a shared
 ounter between the parties). For simpli ity and generality, in the above spe i ation of proto ol
NetAut we abstra t out the spe i message di erentiation me hanism in use.
    Our goal is to show that if the key-ex hange proto ol  is SK-se ure and the MAC fun tion f is
se ure (against hosen-message atta ks) then the resultant network hannels proto ol NetAut(; f )
provides authenti ated transmission of information. This requirement an be formulated under the
property that \any message re orded by Pi as re eived from Pj has been ne essarily re orded as
sent by Pj , ex ept if the pertinent session is exposed". We will a tually strengthen this requirement
and ask that a network hannels proto ol provides authenti ation if it emulates (i.e. imitates) the
transmission of messages in the ideally authenti ated-links model am. Formally, we do so using
the notion of proto ol emulation and the formalization (see Se tions 2.3 and 3.4) of the message
transmission proto ol (mt) in the am as done in [2℄. Re all that mt is a simple proto ol that spe i es
the fun tionality of transmitting individual messages in the am. Here we extend the basi de nition
of mt to a session-based message transmission proto ol alled smt. By proving that the network
 hannels proto ol NetAut emulates smt in the um we get the assuran e that transmitting messages
over unauthenti ated-links using NetAut is as se ure as transmitting them in the presen e of an
atta ker that is not allowed to hange, dupli ate or inje t messages over the ommuni ation links.
Proto ol smt. We extend proto ol mt from [2℄ to t our session-based setting in whi h trans-
mitted messages are grouped into di erent sessions. We all the extended proto ol a session-based
message transmission proto ol (smt), and de ne it in Figure 9. (Note the stru tural similarity be-
tween smt and NetChan { the di eren es are that no a tual key-ex hange is run in smt, and the
fun tions snd and r v are instantiated to simple \identity fun tions".)
Se ure network authenti ation proto ols. Sin e proto ol smt represents a perfe tly authen-
ti ated ex hange of messages, we use it as the spe i ation proto ol to de ne what is meant for an
implementation of proto ol NetChan to be a se ure network authenti ation proto ol (for the de nition
of the notion of \emulation" used in the following de nition see Se tion 3.4):

De nition 11 Proto ol NetChan(; snd; r v) is alled a se ure network authenti ation proto ol if it
emulates proto ol smt in the um.

                                                 28
                                               Proto ol smt


   Proto ol smt an be invoked within a party Pi under the following a tivations:
      1. establish-session(Pi; Pj ; s): in this ase Pi re ords in its lo al output \established session
         s with Pj ".
      2. expire-session(Pi ; Pj ; s): in this ase Pi re ords in its lo al output \session s with Pj is
         expired".
      3. send(Pi ; Pj ; s; m): in this ase Pi he ks that session (Pi ; Pj ; s) has been established and not
         expired, if so it sends message m to Pj together with the session-id s (i.e., the values m and s
         are sent over the ideally-authenti ated link between Pi and Pj ); Pi re ords in its lo al output
         \sent message m to Pj within session s".
      4. On in oming message (m; s) re eived over its link from Pj , Pi he ks that session (Pi ; Pj ; s) is
         established and not expired, if so it re ords in the lo al output \re eived message m from
         Pj within session s".

   Figure 9: Proto ol smt in the am: The spe i ation proto ol for authenti ated session-
   based message transmission.


Theorem 12 If  is a SK-se ure key-ex hange proto ol in the um and f is a MAC fun tion
se ure against hosen message atta ks, then proto ol NetAut(; f ) is a se ure network authenti ation
proto ol.
Proof: In order to show that NetAut(; f ) is a se ure network authenti ation proto ol we need to
prove that NetAut(; f ) emulates smt in the um. Namely, given an atta ker U against NetAut(; f )
in the um we need to build an am-atta ker, A, against smt that produ es a proto ol and adversary
output that is indistinguishable from the output produ ed by the intera tion of U with NetAut(; f ).
We de ne A to simulate U as follows. A builds a virtual \unauthenti ated" s enario in whi h it
simulates U where to ea h party in smt orresponds a virtual party in the um world of NetAut(; f ).
We denote by  the smt proto ol run in the am by A, and by 0 the simulated virtual proto ol
NetAut(; f ) in the um. Also, we denote by P1 ; : : : ; Pn the parties running the smt-proto ol , and
by P10 ; : : : ; Pn0 the orresponding virtual parties running 0 .
    All the a tivations by U (su h as invoking ke-sessions, issuing \send" a tivations, orrupting
parties and sessions, et .) are arried out in the virtual proto ol 0 through A. In parti ular, the
a tion of virtual parties are arried out by A on their behalf; this in ludes the running of ke-session
within 0 parties and the transmission of messages. The des ription of A is presented in Figure 10.
The following fa ts about the behavior of A as de ned in Figure 10 are easy to inspe t.
  1. A is a legal atta ker against smt in am (in parti ular, only previously re orded sent messages
     are delivered, ex ept if the sender is orrupted or the session is exposed).
  2. The a tions of U are perfe tly simulated by A (i.e., arried identi ally by A) against 0 .
  3. All sent, established and expired events re orded in 0 are equally re orded in .
  4. re eived events in  an di er from those in 0 only in the following ase (see Step 5 in
     Figure 10): party Pi0 re orded \re eived message m from Pj0 within session s" in 0

                                                     29
                                               Adversary     A
   A pro eeds as follows when intera ting with P1 :::Pn running smt in the am.
      1. A initiates a opy of U , intera ting with parties P10 :::Pn0 running NetAut(; f ) in the um. In
         parti ular, it evaluates the initialization fun tion I of NetAut(; f ) on random input and hands
         U the publi output of I .
      2. Whenever U a tivates Pi0 with an a tivation establish-session(Pi0; Pj0 ; s; role) or any a tivation
         of Pi0 related to the run of a ke-session of proto ol  , A performs the resultant a tions within
         Pi0 and hands out the resultant messages to U for delivery.
      3. Whenever U issues Pi0 with one of the NetAut(; f ) a tivations send(Pi0 ; Pj0 ; s; m), expire-
         session(Pi ; Pj ; s), or with in oming message (Pj ; s; m; t), A performs the resultant a tions
                   0   0                                    0
         of the players in 0 a ording to the NetAut(; f ) spe i ations. Every message generated by
         the parties is transferred by A to U for delivery.
      4. Whenever Pi0 re ords one of the events \established session s with Pj0 ", \session
         s with Pj0 is expired", or \sent message m to Pj0 within session s", then in  at-
         ta ker A issues to Pi the a tivation establish-session(Pi; Pj ; s), expire-session(Pi ; Pj ; s),
         send(Pi ; Pj ; s; m), respe tively.

      5. Whenever Pi0 re ords \re eived message m from Pj0 within session s", A does:
           (a) If Pj re orded \sent message m to Pi within session s" then A a tivates Pi with
               in oming message (m; s) from Pj .
           (b) Else, if Pj is orrupted or session s within Pj is lo ally exposed, then A a tivates Pj with
               send(Pj ; Pi ; s; m) (note that this sent event is not re orded at Pj by the onvention that
               lo ally exposed sessions do not produ e output) and then a tivates Pi with in oming
               message (m; s) from Pj .
      6. Whenever U orrupts Pi0 , A hands U the internal data of the simulated Pi0 , and orrupts Pi
         in the run of . Whenever U issues an exposure a tion against a session (Pi0 ; Pj0 ; s) within Pi0 ,
         A hands U the orresponding information from the session within Pi0 and issues the exposure
         against the session (Pi ; Pj ; s) within Pi in .
      7. When U halts, A outputs whatever U outputs and halts.

                         Figure 10: Emulation of smt: the am-adversary A.


      but Pj0 did not re ord the orresponding sent event, and neither session s is exposed nor Pj0
      is orrupted. We all this ase a forgery-event.
     The above fa ts show that the simulation of U by A against the NetAut(; f ) proto ol is perfe t
(i.e. identi al to a real run of U ) as long as a forgery-event as de ned above does not happen. (In
the ase of a forgery-event the simulation of U by A fails sin e in 0 party Pi0 re ords the re eived
message m while in  the orresponding party Pi will not re ord it.) In Lemma 13 below we show
that this forgery-event happens with negligible probability (i.e., there is a negligible probability that
in an unexposed session of 0 , a party Pi0 a epts a message from Pj0 that the latter did not send).
Therefore, we have that the statisti al distan e between authsmt;A (k) and unauthNetAut(;f );U (k)
is negligible. Consequently, NetAut(; f ) emulates smt in the um and thus it is a se ure network
authenti ation proto ol.                                                                               2
                                                      30
Lemma 13 If  is a SK-se ure key-ex hange proto ol and f is a MAC fun tion se ure against
 hosen message atta ks, then for any atta ker U running against NetAut the probability of a \forgery-
event" (as de ned in the proof of Theorem 12) during an unexposed session is negligible.

Proof: We prove the lemma by ontradi tion: if for a given atta ker U against NetAut(; f ),
a forgery-event happens in an unexposed session with non-negligible probability then we build a
forger for the MAC fun tion f that su eeds with non-negligible probability. For onvenien e, we
denote the above assumed non-negligible probability of a forgery-event by " (more pre isely, this
value is a fun tion of the se urity parameter).
Building a forger F . The forger F has an ora le to f that uses an unknown random key; F an
request from the ora le the value of f on any message under the ora les key and an also request
the veri ation of pairs (m; t) in whi h ase the ora le veri es whether t is the orre t value of f (m)
under the ora le's key (the latter are alled \veri ation queries"). The goal of F is to produ e a
MAC forgery, i.e. the value of f on a message under the key of the ora le, without requesting the
box to ompute this value. F starts by building a virtual NetAut world and a tivates U against
it (similarly as A did in the proof of Theorem 12 but without any \smt parties"). In addition,
F hooses a session at random (from all sessions ompleted during the run of the proto ol), say
(Pi ; Pj ; s0 ). We will use the identi er s0 to refer to the hosen session or its mat hing session. In
the ases where U delivers a message under the session-key of session s0 , F does not use the a tual
session-key as ex hanged in the simulated proto ol but instead it requests the ora le to f to provide
that value of f (i.e F is e e tively using the ora le key as the s0 session-key). Similarly, F uses
the ora le to verify whether messages sent under session s0 possess the orre t value of f (this is
needed in ases where U inje ts or hanges the authenti ation tags). If during simulation session
s0 is exposed by U , then F aborts its omputation (i.e. it fails to forge). If at any point one of the
partners to session s0 , say Pi , a epts a message as orre tly MACed while the other party did not
re ord the orresponding sent event (in parti ular, F did not request the MAC of this message from
its ora le) then F outputs the message and its MAC as sent to Pi as a forgery against the ora le
to the MAC fun tion f . (Note that by the uniqueness property of sent and re eived messages in
NetAut the message on whi h F outputs this forgery was never queried from the MAC ora le.)
     Thus, if in the run of U by F a forgery-event happens under session s0 then F su eeds in
produ ing a forgery against the MAC. We want to show that this happens with non-negligible
probability.
     Re all that we are assuming (by way of ontradi tion) that in a regular run by U a forgery-event
happens with non-negligible probability ". Thus, if one hooses a session s0 at random, then in a
run of U a forgery-event will happen in session s0 with non-negligible probability too (i.e., " divided
by an upper bound on the number of sessions in the proto ol). However, the run of U by the forger
F is not a regular run: the key used to MAC messages in session s0 is not the real session key
ex hanged by the parties but an independent random value. Still we laim that if in a run of U we
repla e the session-key in a randomly hosen session s0 with a random value then the probability
of a forgery-event in that session does not hange signi antly, i.e., it remains non-negligible (and
thus F has a non-negligible probability to break the se urity of the MAC fun tion f ).
     In order to prove this laim we introdu e the following notation. If s is a session ompleted by
some party under a run of U , then we denote by forgery(s) the event that a forgery-event happens
during session s. We know, by assumption, that if s is hosen at random among all sessions under
a regular run of U then the probability of event forgery(s) is non-negligible. We want to prove
that this is the ase even when U is run by F . (In this ase, this probability, that we denote by
P robF (forgery(s)), is taken over runs of U in whi h the real session-key for s is repla ed with a

                                                  31
random value.) The remainder of the proof is devoted to proving this laim.
    The plan for this proof is as follows. Based on U , we build a ke-adversary Uke against the ke
proto ol . Then we show that if in the modi ed run of U as produ ed by forger F the probability
of a forgery-event hanges substantially (relative to its probability in a regular run of U ), then Uke
breaks the SK-se urity of  (i.e., it an hoose a test-session in whi h to distinguish the real value
of the session-key from a random independent value.)
    Atta ker Uke runs  with n parties P1 ; : : : ; Pn by essentially simulating the a tions of U against
a NetAut proto ol with proto ol  and MAC fun tion f . For this, Uke runs U against a virtual opy
of NetAut(; f ), denoted 0 , with n players P10 ; : : : ; Pn0 . Ea h a tion de ided by U that on erns the
ke proto ol part of 0 (su h as session establishment, party orruptions, session exposure, et .) is
applied by Uke against the real run of  (i.e. against parties P1 ; : : : ; Pn ). Whenever U orders an
a tion involving the omputation of a MAC value by party Pi0 using a ompleted and unexpired
session-key (Pi0 ; Pj0 ; s), Uke he ks if it has already learned the value of that key (via a previous
session exposure). If not, Uke issues a session-key query against (Pi ; Pj ; s). With the value of the
learned session-key, Uke omputes the required value of f and hands it to U .
    There is one ex eption, however, to the above behavior of Uke . Among the sessions ompleted
in the run of , atta ker Uke hooses one at random as its test-session (e.g., Uke hooses at the
beginning of its run a number j 2 f1; : : : ; `g where ` is an upper bound on the number of sessions
 reated by U during its run, and then Uke hooses the j -th ompleted session as its test session).
If U ends its run before the test-session is hosen, or if this session happens to be exposed at time
of ompletion (i.e., either a partner to the session is orrupted before ompletion or U issued a
session-state reveal against this session) then Uke stops its run without issuing a test-session query.
Otherwise, on e the hosen test-session is ompleted, Uke issues a test-session query. We denote
the test-session as s0 , and the response to the test query as v (as usual a bit b R freal; randomg
is hosen and v is set to the real value of the session-key if b = real and to a random independent
value otherwise9 .) Whenever U evaluates f involving the key of session s0 , Uke uses v as the
value of the key for f . If at any point U produ es a forgery-event in session s0 (i.e. U is able to
MAC under key v a message not MACed by Uke ) then Uke stops and outputs b0 = real. If at
some point U stops its run, or if U orders the exposure of session s0 , then Uke stops and outputs
b0 R freal; randomg.
    Re all that we want to prove that P robF (forgery(s0 )) is non-negligible. This is equivalent to
proving that the onditional probability
                                     = P robUke (forgery(s0 ) : b = random)
(now taken over the distribution of runs by Uke against proto ol ) is non-negligible. In order to
show this we start by noting that the onditional probability
                                       = P robUke (forgery(s0 ) : b = real)
represents the probability that a forgery-event happens in a regular run of U (i.e. with all real
session-keys used for MAC-ing information) in a randomly sele ted session s0 . As said earlier, this
probability is "=` (the values " and ` are de ned above), and then non-negligible. We end the proof
by proving that  (i.e. they di er by only a negligible amount) and thus is non-negligible.
This proof is obtained via the analysis of the probability, denoted P rob(b0 = real), that Uke ends
its run with output b0 = real (we onsider this probability only over runs in whi h Uke issues a
  9
      For larity, we denote bits by real and random rather than 0; 1.


                                                        32
test-session query). We have that P rob(b0 = real) equals
P rob(b0 = real : forgery(s0 ))P rob(forgery(s0 ))+P rob(b0 = real : :forgery(s0 ))P rob(:forgery(s0 ))
By the de nition of Uke , P rob(b0 = real : forgery(s0 )) is always 1 regardless of whether b is real
or random. Similarly, P rob(b0 = real : :forgery(s0 )) is always 1/2 regardless of the value of b.
    Now onsider the ase b = real; we have that
              P rob(b0 = real : b = real) =
              = 1  P rob(forgery(s0 ) : b = real) + 1=2  P rob(:forgery(s0 ) : b = real) =
              = 1  + 1=2  (1      ) = 1=2 + =2:
Similarly, for b = random we an obtain
                           P rob(b0 = real : b = random) = 1=2 + =2:
Sin e  is a SK-se ure ke proto ol we know that the di eren e between P rob(b0 = real : b = real)
and P rob(b0 = real : b = random) is negligible, or otherwise Uke would break the se urity of .
But then we have that  as we had to prove.                                                        2
    Thus we have ompleted the proof of Theorem 12 showing that SK-se urity is a suÆ ient on-
dition to guarantee the se ure omposition of key-ex hange proto ol with a network authenti ation
appli ation. One important aspe t of the above proof is that it makes lear the need for allowing
the atta ker against the key-ex hange proto ol (Uke in our ase) to keep running even after the
value of the test-session is provided to him (see the remark after De nition 4); indeed, without that
 apability the theorem is not true.

6.3 Network En ryption
In this se tion we treat the problem of se re y of ommuni ations, and introdu e a de nition of
se re y in the ontext of general network hannels proto ols as de ned in Se tion 6.1. This notion of
se re y is used in the next subse tion to formulate our de nition of se ure hannels and to analyze
a spe i implementation of su h hannels using SK-se ure ke proto ols.
Se ure network en ryption proto ols. We start by de ning what is meant for a network
 hannels proto ol NetChan to be a \se ure network en ryption proto ol". We want to apture
the se re y property that the atta ker does not learn information on messages that are ex hanged
during unexposed sessions (see the \explanation" paragraph following the de nition). We follow
the indistinguishability approa h used to de ne semanti se urity of en ryption (also used in our
de nition of SK-se urity). For this we augment the apabilities of am and um atta kers that intera t
with a network hannels proto ol to in lude the following a tion.

     We let the atta ker A, running against NetChan, to hoose, at some arbitrary point
     during the intera tion, a (single) test-session (Pi ; Pj ; s) among the sessions that are
      ompleted, unexpired and unexposed at the time. Also, A gets to hoose a pair of
     equal-length messages m0 ; m1 . Next, a bit b R f0; 1g is hosen (but not provided to A)
     and Pi is a tivated with send(Pi ; Pj ; s; mb ). This a tivation follows the spe i ation of
     a regular send-a tivation in the proto ol ex ept that when Pi re ords the sent event in
     its lo al output it does not write down the value of mb . Later, if Pj is a tivated by A
     under session s with some in oming message  and the output of r v () (where  is

                                                  33
     the session-key of the test session s) is the pair (mb ; ok = 1) then the re eive-a tivation
     is re orded by the re ipient but the value mb is not written to the lo al output. The
     atta ker A is allowed all the regular adversarial a tions ex ept that it is not permitted to
     expose the test-session (Pi ; Pj ; s). (However, as in the ase of SK-se urity, the atta ker
     is allowed to orrupt Pi as soon as the test-session expires, and to orrupt Pj as soon
     as the mat hing session expires.) At the end of its run, A outputs a bit b0 (as its guess
     for b).

De nition 14 We say that a network hannels proto ol is a se ure network en ryption proto ol in
the um if the probability of any um-atta ker A as des ribed above to guess orre tly b (i.e., to output
b0 = b) is no more than 1/2 plus a negligible fra tion in the se urity parameter.
Se urity of a network en ryption proto ol is de ned in the am in the same form provided the
atta ker is a am-adversary with the above added apability.
Explanation. We larify the rationale of the above de nition. In this de nition we want to
 apture the se re y property of a network hannels proto ol, namely, the infeasibility of the atta ker
to learn information on messages transmitted (usually in en rypted form) between the parties.
However, note that in our formalism of network hannels the atta ker gets to learn the sent and
re eived messages by wat hing the lo al output of the parties (re all that whatever is written on the
lo al output be omes immediately available to A); moreover, the atta ker even gets to hoose the
messages in sent-a tivations. So, how an we say that the atta ker does not learn the ex hanged
messages? For this, we introdu e the test messages m0 and m1 that the atta ker gets to hoose but
not to learn whi h one was sent. In parti ular, in order to hide this information from the atta ker
we spe ify that the send and re eive a tivations orresponding to the test message do not re ord
the value of the spe i sent or re eived message. Thus, for a proto ol to be se ure by our de nition
it needs to make infeasible for the atta ker to guess orre tly (i.e., with non-negligible advantage)
the sent test-message even though this atta ker has a ess to all other messages (in leartext form)
that were sent and re eived during the proto ol.

6.3.1 Dis ussion
One importat aspe t of the above de nition is the way we spe ify the re eive-a tivations (at Pj )
in whi h the test-message mb is not written to the lo al output. In order to highlight this issue
let's onsider rst an alternative de nition of se urity of network en ryption proto ols. Namely,
a de nition similar to the above de nition with the di eren e that the only re eive-a tivation in
whi h mb is not written to the lo al output is an a tivation where the in oming message is identi al
to the message, all it m , handed to A by Pi as the result of the test send-a tivation. In the sequel
we refer to this variant of the de nition as the \stri t de nition" (of se ure network en ryption
proto ols). The reason that we have not adopted this stri t de nition is that we onsider it over-
restri tive: for example, this de nition all inse ure any network en ryption proto ol that spe i es
that the message delivered to Pj is di erent from the exa t output produ ed by Pi . In parti ular, it
would invalidate any proto ol that allows for some hanges to the transported messages to happen
in transit, even though su h proto ols are ommon in pra ti e and se ure. For example, the AH
proto ol from [31℄ allows some well de ned parts of the message header, su h as number of hops, to
be hanged in-route by intermediate routers. Other proto ols allow for arbitrary or random padding
of messages just to omply with some standard length boundary; a hange in-route of su h padding
would not be he ked by the re eiver nor should su h hange impa t the se urity of the proto ol.

                                                 34
Thus, a better (and more realisti ) approa h is to permit su h possible (ino ous) hanges to the
transported message, and only are about the orre tness of the value of the message a epted and
re orded by the re eiver, namely, the output of the r v fun tion. This is why, under our de nition,
we onsider any in oming message that \de odes" (under r v) to the test message mb as related to
the test send-a tivation and then its de oded value is not dis losed to the atta ker.
    One onsequen e of this de nitional de ision is that while De nition 14 does not expli itly
mention the need to ensure the uniqueness of messages or the use of message identi ers, it a tually
requires from a se ure network en ryption proto ol to be areful about the way it guarantees
the uniqueness of transmitted messages. To illustrate this point onsider the following strategy
for atta ker A. After a tivating Pi with the test send-a tivation with messages m0 and m1 , A
a tivates Pi with another send-a tivation with m0 as the input message. Now, A delivers to Pj
the message resultant from the later send-a tivation. If Pj does not write the de oded message
to its lo al output then A learns that mb = m0 , if Pj does write the message then A learns that
mb = m1 . Thus a se ure network en ryption proto ol must make this atta k impossible for A and,
in parti ular, it must ensure the uniqueness of sent messages. This an be a hieved by the use of
unique message identi ers that be ome part of the sent messages. We exemplify this me hanism
in our realization of se ure hannels in Se tion 6.4.
    Another remark on erning the \stri t de nition" dis ussed above is that it naturally orre-
sponds to the way se urity of en ryption fun tions against hosen iphertext atta ks (CCA) is
usually de ned. (That is, the de nition of CCA se urity allows an atta ker to query a de ryption
ora le with any input iphertext ex ept for the one in whi h the atta ker is being tested.) While
this orresponden e an be seen as an advantage of the \stri t de nition" it a tually points to an
important issue here: CCA-se urity is not a ne essary notion when formalizing se urity of network
 hannels. Indeed, the CCA formulation a tually arries the same drawba ks as dis ussed before
for the stri t de nition. A further illustration of these issues an be found in the remark after the
proof of Theorem 16.
On the orre tness requirement. Noti e that De nition 14 does not make any \ orre tness"
requirements from the en ryption proto ol. That is, it is not required that the re ipient will output
the same message as re orded by the sender. While this is a natural requirement for a network en-
 ryption proto ol (we want de rypted messages to orrespond to the plaintext originally en rypted)
we omit it from our de nition sin e our use of network en ryption (for de ning and realizing se ure
 hannels { see De nition 15) appears only in onjun tion with a network authenti ation proto ol,
and the latter already guarantees this orre tness property. If one is interested in a stand-alone
use of the notion of a network en ryption proto ol then adding this orre tness requirement to the
above de nition is straightforward.

6.4 Se ure Channels
We are now ready to de ne what is meant by a \se ure hannels" proto ol.

De nition 15 A network hannels proto ol in the um is alled a se ure network hannels proto ol
if it is a se ure network en ryption proto ol and also a se ure network authenti ation proto ol.

   We pro eed to show that the network hannels proto ol, denoted NetSe and de ned below,
that applies en ryption to transmitted messages and applies a se ure MAC fun tion to the resultant
 iphertext is a se ure hannels proto ol. In the des ription of this proto ol we assume expli it
message identi ers that are part of the sent messages and make all these messages ne essarily

                                                 35
                                                                           ) where m is hosen by
di erent. Spe i ally, the input to a send a tivation is a pair m = (m-id; m
the atta ker at will but m-id is an identi er that is independent from the message ( an think of it
as a message ounter) and is di erent from all message identi ers used in other send a tivations
in the same session. In a tual implementations of the proto ol this unique m-id value needs to be
 hosen by the sender and he ked for uniqueness at the re eiver; here we represent it as part of
the input to the send a tivation in order to be onsistent with our general formalism of network
 hannels from Figure 8 and to avoid the spe i ation of a parti ular message-id me hanism. This
uniqueness of message identi ers is assumed only for un orrupted sessions.
The se ure hannels proto ol NetSe . Let  be a ke proto ol, f a MAC fun tion, En
a symmetri en ryption fun tion, and F a family of pseudorandom fun tions. We denote by
NetSe (; f; En ; F ) the network hannels proto ol NetChan(; snd; r v), as de ned in Figure 8,
that uses the snd and r v fun tions de ned as:
     On input m = (m-id; m ), snd(m) produ es output m0 = (m-id; ; t) where         = En e (m  )
      and t = fa (m-id; ). The keys e and a are omputed as F (0) and F (1), respe tively .  10



     On input m0, r v(m0) outputs (m; ok) as follows. If m0 is of the form (m-id; ; t) then ok = 1
      if and only if (i) m-id is di erent than all previously seen message identi ers in the session,
      and (ii) (m-id; ; t) passes the veri ation fun tion of f under key a . If ok = 1 then set
      m = En e1 ( ) and m = (m-id; m   ), otherwise ok = 0 and m = null. The keys e and a are
      de ned as above.
That is, fun tion snd applies an en ryption on the message and a MAC to the iphertext where these
fun tions use \ omputationally independent" keys derived from the session  via a pseudorandom
fun tion. The fun tion r v does the de ryption but only after verifying that the authenti ation of
the iphertext is orre t.
Note 1: We stress again our assumption that message identi ers are di erent for ea h sent message
in a session (and he ked for uniqueness at the re ipient). In parti ular, this means that an
implementation of the message id me hanism needs to make sure that the two parties of the
session (while un orrupted) hoose di erent identi ers for ea h new message. This an a hieved,
for example, if ea h party hooses the values m-id from disjoint sets (e.g., Pi sets the rst bit of its
identi ers to 0 and Pj to 1). A tual proto ols an also spe ify the use of \dire tional" keys, i.e.,
the keys used for the snd fun tion from Pi to Pj are di erent (and omputationally independent)
from the keys used from Pj to Pi ; in this ase message identi ers need only be unique per dire tion.
Clearly, these multiple keys an be derived from the session key  using a pseudorandom fun tion.
Note 2: Message identi ers are not prote ted for se re y. Sin e they are hosen independently of the
sent message this does not ompromise the se re y of the message. In parti ular, when analyzing
the above proto ol as a network en ryption proto ol, we assume that the test messages m0 and m1
from De nition 14 have the same message identi er so its exposure provides no information to the
atta ker about whi h message mb was a tually sent.
    In the following theorem we use the notion of a symmetri en ryption fun tion that is se ure
against hosen-plaintext atta ks. For a formalization of this notion see [3℄ (see also the CPA game
in Figure 11).
   10
      For simpli ity we assume the en ryption and authenti ation fun tions to use uniformly distributed keys of the
same length; other ases an be handled via standard key derivation methods (e.g., trun ating the output of F ,
iterating F to produ e longer outputs, et .).


                                                        36
Theorem 16 If  is a SK-se ure key-ex hange proto ol in um, f is a MAC fun tion se ure against
 hosen-message atta ks, En a symmetri en ryption fun tion se ure against hosen-plaintext at-
ta ks, and F a se ure family of pseudorandom fun tions, then NetSe (; f; En ; F ) is a se ure
 hannels proto ol in the um.

Proof: We an assume, for simpli ity, that keys e and a in NetSe (; f; En ; F ) are dire t
outputs of proto ol  (and then indistinguishable from uniformly and independently hosen keys).
A ounting for the fa t that we a tually derive them from a single session key  via a pseudorandom
fun tion an be done using standard arguments.
    The proof that NetSe (; f; En ; F ) is a se ure network authenti ation proto ol follows from
Theorem 12 with one modi ation: here we are not applying the MAC fun tion dire tly to the
plaintext but on the iphertext. Sin e by property of the en ryption fun tion we have that a
 iphertext de rypts to a unique plaintext under key e then the authenti ation of the iphertext
implies the authenti ation of the plaintext message. (Formally, one an onsider a modi ation of
proto ol NetAut in Theorem 12 where the fun tion snd is de ned to rst en rypt the message and
then authenti ate the iphertext under the MAC fun tion; the output of snd is the on atenation
of the omputed iphertext and MAC tag. Similarly, r v rst he ks the MAC on the iphertext,
and if su essful it de rypts the iphertext and outputs the plaintext message.)
    The rest of the proof is devoted to proving that NetSe (; f; En ; F ) is a se ure network en-
 ryption proto ol. The plan for the proof and many of the details are similar to the proof of the
network authenti ation theorem (Theorem 12, and more spe i ally of Lemma 13). We thus sket h
the most important aspe ts of the urrent proof but omit the details that are easy to omplete
following the network authenti ation ase. Our goal here is to prove the theorem by way of ontra-
di tion, namely, given an atta ker A that breaks the se urity of NetSe (; f; En ; F ) as a network
en ryption proto ol then we an build an atta ker B that breaks the se urity of the symmetri
en ryption fun tion En against hosen-plaintext atta ks.

                              The CPA symmetri          en ryption game


   The game is played by an atta ker B with a ess to an en ryption ora le E . On input m, the ora le
   returns the en ryption of m under fun tion En using a se ret key  not provided to B . The game
   pro eeds in phases:
   Phase 1:  B queries E with any messages of its hoi e. At any point B may hoose to move to
         phase 2.
   Phase 2:   B hooses two equal-length messages m0 and m1 ; a bit b is hosen at random and the
         value  = E (mb ) is returned to B . (The value of b is not provided to B .)
   Phase 3:   Same as Phase 1.
   Phase 4:B outputs a bit b0 .
   And the winner is... B if and only if b = b .
                                              0



               Figure 11: CPA-se urity of the symmetri en ryption fun tion En


   In order to apture the CPA-se urity of En (i.e., its se urity against hosen-plaintext atta ks)
we onsider the game des ribed in Figure 11. By the assumption that En is semanti ally se ure

                                                   37
against hosen-plaintext atta ks we have that no polynomial-time atta ker B an win this game with
non-negligible advantage (where \advantage" means the winning probability minus 1/2). However,
we show next how to onstru t su h atta ker B given an atta ker A that breaks the se urity of
NetSe (; f; En ; F ) as a network en ryption proto ol, i.e. an atta ker A that wins the test of
De nition 14 against NetSe (; f; En ; F ) with non-negligible advantage. This proves that su h an
atta ker A does not exist and then NetSe (; f; En ; F ) is a se ure network en ryption proto ol.
(A pre ise quanti ed relation between the su ess probability of B and A an be easily derived
from the proof arguments below.)
Building B given A. Phase 1. B starts by building a virtual NetSe (; f; En ; F ) world (in luding
the hoi e of initial information for the parties) and a tivates A against it. In addition, B hooses
a session at random (from all sessions ompleted during the virtual run of NetSe (; f; En ; F ))
under A, say (Pi ; Pj ; s0 ). We will use the identi er s0 to refer to the hosen session or its mat hing
session. All a tions by A (a tivations or orruptions) that do not involve session s0 are arried by
B using the spe i ation of NetSe (; f; En ; F ) and based on the full knowledge that B has of the
information held by the parties in the proto ol. If at any point session s0 is exposed by A (this
may happen as long as the session is unexpired at Pi or Pj ) then B outputs a random bit b0 and
stops. When A a tivates the establishment of the ke session s0 between Pi and Pj , B a tivates
Pi and Pj with the normal operations for session-key establishment as in proto ol . When A
a tivates Pi or Pj with a send-a tivation under session s0 and input message m = (m-id; m            ), B
                                                                                             0
does not use the a tual key shared in session s0 to ompute the outgoing message m . Instead, B
 omputes m0 = (m-id; ; t) where = E (m          ) (i.e., B uses the en ryption ora le for the en ryption
of messages under session s0 ) and t = fa (m-id; ) where a is a key that B hooses independently
and at random for use as the MAC key during session s0 .
Re eive-a tivations under session s0 are handled by B (during Phase 1) as follows. Say Pj is
a tivated with in oming message m0 = (m-id; ; t) under session s0 , then B he ks m-id for validity
and if valid it uses its knowledge of a to verify the authenti ation tag t. If any of these veri ations
fail then Pj sets ok = 0 and m = null. If the veri ation is su essful, in parti ular the triple
(m-id; ; t) passes the veri ation of fa , then (ex ept for a negligible probability of forgery against
the MAC) the pair (m-id; ) was in luded in the output of a previous send-a tivation under session
s0 in whi h ase B already knows the plaintext en rypted under iphertext and an re ord the
re eption of the message in Pj 's lo al input.
If at any point A hooses a test session (a ording to De nition 14) di erent than s0 then B outputs
a random bit b0 and stops. If s0 is hosen by A as the test session and messages m0 and m1 are
provided by A then B moves to phase 2.
Phase 2. Sin e we assume message-identi ers that are independent from the message then we have
that the test messages m0 and m1 hosen by A have the same message identi er, whi h we denote
by m-id . Namely, m0 = (m-id ; m    0 ) and m1 = (m-id ; m  1 ). Now, B uses the messages m
                                                                                                0 and m1
as its own test messages to ora le E in the CPA game. Let  be the value returned to B as the
ora le response to this test. B then hands to A the triple (m-id ;  ; t ) where t = fa (m-id ;  ).
As spe i ed in De nition 14, Pi does not re ord the a tual value of m          b (whi h B does not know
anyway). Now, B moves to phase 3.
Phase 3. The a tions of B in Phase 3 are similar to Phase 1 ex ept that now A may a tivate Pj
with in oming message ontaining (m-id ;  ) for whi h B does not know its de ryption. In this
 ase, B rst he ks the validity of the authenti ation tag in the in oming message. If it fails then no
a tion is needed. If it is su essful then Pj re ords the re eption of the message in its lo al output
but without spe ifying the de rypted message sin e this message is mb whi h, by spe i ation of


                                                   38
De nition 14, Pj does not write to its lo al output (thus, B does not need to know mb ).
Phase 4. Whenever A stops its run with output b0 , B moves to phase 4 and stops with the same
output b0 as A.
Analysis of B. It is easy to verify that B as de ned above is a legal atta ker in the CPA game of
Figure 11. We need to show that B has non-negligible advantage in winning that game. Proving
this is similar to the analysis of the su ess probability of forger F in the proof of Lemma 13. First,
we laim that the event in whi h the session s0 hosen at random by B is also the test session
 hosen by A has non-negligible probability to o ur (simply be ause there are only polynomially
many sessions). Se ond, we note that if s0 is hosen by A as the test session and B arries the
a tions of A related to session s0 using the a tual session key ex hanged by Pi and Pj in that
session then the advantage of B to guess b orre tly is the same as for A to guess orre tly (sin e
in this ase the simulation of A by B is perfe t) and then non-negligible. So, the main argument is
to show that repla ing the a tual session keys (for authenti ation and for en ryption) from session
s0 with the random independent key a hosen by B for the MAC and the random independet
key used by ora le E for its en ryptions does not signi antly hange the odds of A to win. This
fa t follows from the SK-se urity of the ke proto ol  and its proof is similar to the proof of the
analogous fa t in Lemma 13 (with B and A taking the roles of F and U , respe tively).
                                                                                                    2
On the (non) ne essity of CCA-se urity. The above Theorem shows that se urity against
 hosen-plaintext atta ks (CPA) is all we need to require from the fun tion En in order to imple-
ment se ure hannels. This is an important property sin e most symmetri en ryption fun tions
and modes used in pra ti e are CPA-se ure but not se ure against hosen- iphertext atta ks (CCA).
Also worth noting is that even the ombination of the MAC fun tion f on top of En does not ne es-
sarily result in a CCA-se ure fun tion (namely, the fun tion snd de ned under NetSe (; f; En ; F )
is not ne essarily CCA-se ure when onsidered as an en ryption fun tion with keys e and a ).
To see this onsider a MAC fun tion with the property that ipping the least signi ant bit of an
authenti ation tag does not hange the validity of the tag. In this ase the resultant omposed
fun tion snd is not CCA-se ure while it suÆ es (by virtue of the above theorem) for implementing
se ure hannels.
This example also helps to emphasize the over-restri tive hara ter of the \stri t de nition" of a
se ure network en ryption proto ol as dis ussed in Se tion 6.3.1. Indeed, it is easy to see that
in order for proto ol NetSe to satisfy this stri t de nition one has to make sure that the snd
fun tion in proto ol NetSe is CCA-se ure. In parti ular, the above example shows that the as-
sumption that f is a se ure MAC fun tion is not enough to prove the network en ryption se urity
of NetSe (; f; En ; F ) under the stri t de nition. Su h a de nition would require a stronger no-
tion of a MAC where in addition to the regular unforgeability requirements one requires that the
atta ker annot hange a given valid pair (m; t) (where m is a message and t a valid authenti ation
                                             6 t0. When inspe ting the NetSe proto ol one an easily
tag) into another valid pair (m; t0 ) with t =
see that this extra requirement from the MAC fun tion is not a real se urity ne essity but just the
arti ial result of the unne essarily restri tive nature of the stri t de nition.
The order of en ryption and authenti ation. Re ent results in [33℄ show that if the en ryption
fun tion is assumed to be se ure against hosen-plaintext atta ks (as in the above Theorem) then
the ordering of rst applying the en ryption fun tion and then the authenti ation fun tion (as in
NetSe (; f; En ; F )) is instrumental for guaranteeing se ure hannels. It is shown in [33℄ that other
 ommon orderings of the fun tions (in whi h authenti ation is applied dire tly to the plaintext)
 annot ensure se ure hannels even if the key-ex hange proto ol in use is (ideally) se ure.

                                                 39
Referen es

  [1℄ D. Beaver, \Se ure Multi-party Proto ols and Zero-Knowledge Proof Systems Tolerating a
      Faulty Minority", J. Cryptology (1991) 4: 75-122.
  [2℄ M. Bellare, R. Canetti and H. Kraw zyk, \A modular approa h to the design and analysis
      of authenti ation and key-ex hange proto ols", 30th STOC, 1998.
  [3℄ M. Bellare, A. Desai, E. Jokipii, and P. Rogaway, \A on rete se urity treatment of sym-
      metri en ryption: Analysis of the DES modes of operation", Pro eedings of the 38th Sym-
      posium on Foundations of Computer S ien e, IEEE, 1997.

  [4℄ M. Bellare, A. Desai, D. Point heval, and P. Rogaway, \Relations Among Notions of Se urity
      for Publi -Key En ryption S hemes", Advan es in Cryptology - CRYPTO'98 Pro eedings,
      Le ture Notes in Computer S ien e Vol. 1462, H. Kraw zyk, ed., Springer-Verlag, 1998, pp.
      26{45.
  [5℄ M. Bellare and C. Namprempre, \Authenti ated en ryption: Relations among notions and
      analysis of the generi omposition paradigm", Advan es in Cryptology - ASIACRYPT'00
      Pro eedings, Le ture Notes in Computer S ien e Vol. xxxx, T. Okamoto, ed., Springer-
      Verlag, 2000.
  [6℄ M. Bellare, E. Petrank, C. Ra ko and P. Rogaway, \Authenti ated key ex hange in the
      publi key model," manus ript 1995{96.
  [7℄ M. Bellare and P. Rogaway, \Entity authenti ation and key distribution", Advan es in
      Cryptology, - CRYPTO'93, Le ture Notes in Computer S ien e Vol. 773, D. Stinson ed,
      Springer-Verlag, 1994, pp. 232-249.
  [8℄ M. Bellare and P. Rogaway, \Provably se ure session key distribution{ the three party ase,"
      Annual Symposium on the Theory of Computing (STOC), 1995.

  [9℄ R. Bird, I. Gopal, A. Herzberg, P. Janson, S. Kutten, R. Molva and M. Yung, \Systemati
      design of two-party authenti ation proto ols," IEEE Journal on Sele ted Areas in Commu-
      ni ations (spe ial issue on Se ure Communi ations), 11(5):679{693, June 1993. (Preliminary
      version: Crypto'91.)
 [10℄ S. Blake-Wilson, D. Johnson and A. Menezes, \Key ex hange proto ols and their se urity
      analysis," Pro eedings of the sixth IMA International Conferen e on Cryptography and
      Coding, 1997.

 [11℄ S. Blake-Wilson and A. Menezes, \Entity authenti ation and key transport proto ols em-
      ploying asymmetri te hniques", Se urity Proto ols Workshop, 1997.
 [12℄ M. Burrows, M. Abadi and R. Needham, \A logi for authenti ation," DEC Systems Re-
      sear h Center Te hni al Report 39, February 1990. Earlier versions in Pro eedings of the
      Se ond Conferen e on Theoreti al Aspe ts of Reasoning about Knowledge, 1988, and Pro-
       eedings of the Twelfth ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Prin iples, 1989.

 [13℄ R. Canetti, \Se urity and Composition of Multiparty Cryptographi Proto ols", Journal of
      Cryptology, Vol. 13, No. 1, 2000.


                                              40
[14℄ R. Canetti, \A uni ed framework for analyzing se urity of Proto ols", manus ript, 2000.
     Available at http://eprint.ia r.org/2000/067.
[15℄ R. Canetti, S. Halevi and A. Herzberg, \How to Maintain Authenti ated Communi ation",
     Journal of Cryptology, Winter 2000. Preliminary version at 16th Symp. on Prin iples of
     Distributed Computing (PODC), ACM, 1997, pp. 15-25.

[16℄ R. Canetti and H. Kraw zyk, \Proving se ure omposition of key-ex hange proto ols with
     any appli ation", in preparation.
[17℄ R. Cramer and V. Shoup, \A pra ti al publi -key ryptosystem provably se ure against
     adaptive hosen iphertext atta k", Advan es in Cryptology - CRYPTO'98 Pro eedings,
     Le ture Notes in Computer S ien e Vol. 1462, H. Kraw zyk, ed., Springer-Verlag, 1998.
[18℄ W. DiÆe and M. Hellman, \New dire tions in ryptography," IEEE Trans. Info. Theory
     IT-22, November 1976, pp. 644{654.
[19℄ W. DiÆe, P. van Oors hot and M. Wiener, \Authenti ation and authenti ated key ex-
     hanges", Designs, Codes and Cryptography, 2, 1992, pp. 107{125.
[20℄ D. Dolev, C. Dwork and M. Naor, Non-malleable ryptography, SICOMP, to appear. Pre-
     liminary version in 23rd STOC, 1991.
[21℄ O. Goldrei h, \Foundations of Cryptography (Fragments of a book)", Weizmann Inst. of
     S ien e, 1995. (Available at http://philby.u sd.edu/ ryptolib.html)
[22℄ O. Goldrei h, S. Goldwasser and S. Mi ali, \How to onstru t random fun tions," Journal
     of the ACM, Vol. 33, No. 4, 210{217, (1986).

[23℄ S. Goldwasser, and L. Levin, \Fair Computation of General Fun tions in Presen e of Im-
     moral Majority", CRYPTO '90, LNCS 537, Springer-Verlag, 1990.
[24℄ S. Goldwasser and S. Mi ali, Probabilisti en ryption, JCSS, Vol. 28, No 2, April 1984, pp.
     270-299.
[25℄ S. Goldwasser, S. Mi ali and C. Ra ko , \The Knowledge Complexity of Intera tive Proof
     Systems", SIAM Journal on Comput., Vol. 18, No. 1, 1989, pp. 186-208.
[26℄ C.G. Gunther, \An identity-based key-ex hange proto ol", Advan es in Cryptology - EU-
     ROCRYPT'89, Le ture Notes in Computer S ien e Vol. 434, Springer-Verlag, 1990, pp.
     29-37.
[27℄ S. Halevi, and H. Kraw zyk, \Publi -Key Cryptography and Password Proto ols", ACM
     Transa tions on Information and System Se urity, Vol. 2, No. 3, August 1999, pp. 230{268.

[28℄ D. Harkins and D. Carrel, ed., \The Internet Key Ex hange (IKE)", RFC 2409, November
     1998.
[29℄ ISO/IEC IS 9798-3, \Entity authenti ation me hanisms | Part 3: Entity authenti ation
     using asymmetri te hniques", 1993.
[30℄ J. Katz and M. Yung, \Complete hara terization of se urity notions for probabilisti
     private-key en ryption", Pro eedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
     Computing, 2000.

                                             41
[31℄ S. Kent and R. Atkinson, \Se urity Ar hite ture for the Internet Proto ol", Request for
     Comments 2401, Nov. 1998.

[32℄ H. Kraw zyk, \SKEME: A Versatile Se ure Key Ex hange Me hanism for Internet,", Pro-
     eedings of the 1996 Internet So iety Symposium on Network and Distributed System Se-
     urity, Feb. 1996, pp. 114-127.

[33℄ H. Kraw zyk, \The order of en ryption and authenti ation for prote ting ommuni ations
     (Or: how se ure is SSL?)", to appear Crypto 2001.
[34℄ C. H. Lim and P.J. Lee, \A Key Re overy Atta k on Dis rete Log-based S hemes Using
     a Prime Order Subgroup", Advan es in Cryptology { CRYPTO 97 Pro eedings, Le ture
     Notes in Computer S ien e, Springer-Verlag Vol. 1294, B. Kaliski, ed, 1997, pp. 249{263.
[35℄ P. Lin oln, J. Mit hell, M. Mit hell, A. S hedrov, \A Probabilisti Poly-time Framework for
     Proto ol Analysis", 5th ACM Conf. on Computer and System Se urity, 1998.
[36℄ S. Lu ks, \Open key ex hange: How to defeat di tionary atta ks without en rypting publi
     keys," Pro eedings of the 1997 Se urity Proto ols Workshop, 1997.
[37℄ A. Menezes, P. Van Oors hot and S. Vanstone, \Handbook of Applied Cryptography," CRC
     Press, 1996.
[38℄ S. Mi ali and P. Rogaway, \Se ure Computation", unpublished manus ript, 1992. Prelimi-
     nary version in CRYPTO 91.
[39℄ R. Needham and M. S hroeder, \Using en ryption for authenti ation in large networks of
      omputers," Communi ations of the ACM, Vol. 21, No. 12, De ember 1978, pp. 993{999.
[40℄ B. P tzmann, M. S hunter and M. Waidner, \Se ure Rea tive Systems", IBM Resear h
     Report RZ 3206 (#93252), IBM Resear h, Zuri h, May 2000.
[41℄ B. P tzmann and M. Waidner, \A General Framework for Formal Notions of `Se ure' Sys-
     tem", Hildesheimer Informatik-Beri hte 11/94 Institut fr Informatik, Universitt Hildesheim,
     April 1994.
[42℄ B. P tzmann and M. Waidner, \A model for asyn hronous rea tive systems and its appli-
      ation to se ure message transmission", IEEE Se urity and Priva y Symposium, May 2001.
     Earlier version available in IBM Resear h Report RZ 3304 (#93350), IBM Resear h, Zuri h,
     De ember 2000.
[43℄ V. Shoup, \On Formal Models for Se ure Key Ex hange", Theory of Cryptography Library,
     1999. Available at: http://philby.u sd.edu/ ryptolib/1999/99-12.html.
[44℄ V. Shoup and A. Rubin. \Session key distribution using smart ards", Advan es in Cryp-
     tology { EUROCRYPT 96 Pro eedings, Le ture Notes in Computer S ien e Vol. 1070,
     Springer-Verlag, U. Maurer, ed, 1995.




                                             42
A     More on Related Work

We provide some more details on several de nitional works on ke that are losely related to the
present work.
On the work of Bellare and Rogaway [7, 8℄. The rst omplexity-based formalization of se ure
ke proto ols (i.e., the rst de nitions that take into onsideration the omputational limitations of
an adversary and allow for an analysis that onsiders non-idealized ryptographi primitives) was
presented by Bellare and Rogaway in [7, 8℄, in the ontext of shared long-term keys. These works
postulate an adversary in harge of all ommuni ations, and expli itly model on urrent sessions
by reating a model where the adversary is surrounded by \ora les" that represent sessions within
parties. In su h a model, querying an ora le represents delivery of a message or the orruption
of a session. Their method of de ning se urity is based on the method used for de ning semanti
se urity of en ryption fun tions [24℄: the adversary should be unable to distinguish, with non-
negligible probability, between the key of a hosen session and an independent random value. They
prove the se urity of spe i authenti ation and key ex hange proto ols under these de nitions.
Various works extend the [7, 8℄ framework to other settings and problems; for example, Shoup and
Rubin to smart ard settings [44℄; Lu ks to onsider di tionary atta ks [36℄; Blake-Wilson, Johnson
and Menezes [10, 11℄ for the publi key setting.
    The original formalization of [7, 8℄ was later demonstrated to have a se urity aw, by Ra ko
(personal ommuni ation, 1995). In an unpublished work, Bellare, Petrank, Ra ko and Rogaway
[6℄ proposed a x for this aw. Our de nition of se urity (Se tion 4) follows essentially that xed
version of the [7, 8℄ de nition, but ast in the proto ol and adversary framework used here. Next,
we sket h the Ra ko atta k whi h is instru tive for pointing out to the subtleties involved in the
formalization of se urity for key-ex hange proto ols.
    In the de nitions of [7, 8℄, the adversary points to an unexposed session of its hoi e, and
re eives a value kb , where k0 is the real session key of this session, k1 is an independently hosen
random value, and b is a randomly hosen bit that is unknown to the adversary. The se urity
requirement is that the adversary is unable to predi t b with non-negligible advantage over one
half. The original version of these de nitions requires that the adversary outputs its guess for b
immediately after it obtains the test value. Ra ko has noti ed that this requirement is not strong
enough: Consider your favorite se ure key-ex hange proto ol . Now, add to the spe i ations of
the proto ol the following instru tion for the party that ompletes rst the session establishment
a ording to proto ol : if at any point this party re eives a message with the value MAC (0),
where MAC is a se ure message authenti ation fun tion and  the established session-key, then
the party publi izes (say via a further message in the proto ol) the value of . However, the
proto ol never instru ts any party to arry out su h an instru tion. As a result the proto ol an be
shown to pass the weakened de nition. On the other hand, it is lear that su h a proto ol annot
be omposed se urely with an authenti ation appli ation that uses the session key for MAC-ing
information (sin e su h an appli ation ould produ e the value MAC (0) that an be used to expose
).
    The x to the de nition, proposed by [6℄, is to let the adversary to ontinue intera ting with the
proto ol even after the test value is re eived and before the guess is made. We stress that, although
no atta ks against the xed de nition were known, up till now it was never demonstrated that
this de nition (or any other) is \suÆ iently strong" for guaranteeing the se urity of the ommon
appli ations that use key ex hange.
On the work of Bellare, Canetti and Kraw zyk [2℄. A somewhat di erent approa h to

                                                 43
de ning se ure ke proto ols is taken in the work of Bellare, Canetti and Kraw zyk [2℄. First they
spe ify an adversarial model ( alled the unauthenti ated-links model (um)) that represents the apa-
bilities of the adversary in real-life networks. (As in [7, 8℄, this model also postulates independent
sessions and adversarially ontrolled ommuni ation. However it is di erent in that it dire tly rep-
resents a ommuni ation network and a ounts in a natural way to the fa t that other proto ols
  an be running in the same system.) In this model they formalize the notion of authenti ators,
i.e., \ ompilers" that transform proto ols that assume ideally-authenti ated ommuni ation into
\equivalent" proto ols in the um. (Authenti ators are also formalized, in a di erent ontext, in
[15℄.) In our work we borrow from [2℄ the above proto ol and adversarial models, and demonstrate
the usefulness of the authenti ators notion for designing and analyzing proto ols.
     In addition to the above basi models, [2℄ also treat the issue of se urity of ke proto ols.
For this they formulate an \ideal ke pro ess" that is meant to apture the expe ted properties
of a ke proto ol, and require that a se ure ke proto ol will \emulate" the ideal pro ess. Their
notion of emulation is in uen ed by general de nitions of se urity of multi-party proto ols [23,
38, 1, 13℄. They also onsider the use of ke for maintaining authenti ated ommuni ation. In
parti ular, they laim that the standard method of ombining a ke proto ol with a shared-key
message authenti ation ode (MACs) results in a se ure authenti ator. However, while the basi
approa h of the [2℄ de nition of ke is intuitive and attra tive, their a tual de nition of se ure
ke proto ols has several subtle short omings. One onsequen e is that, ontrary to their laims,
their de nition of ke seems insuÆ ient to prove the se urity of the above-mentioned appli ation to
  onstru ting authenti ators (via ke and MAC). Another onsequen e is that their de nition seems
to be somewhat \over-restri tive", in the sense that it rules out ke proto ols that seem \intuitively
se ure" and even provide se ure omposition with appli ations. In parti ular, Propositions 9 and
10 from [2℄ are in orre t.
On the work of Shoup [43℄. Shoup's de nitions are based on the simulatability approa h of
[2℄ with some signi ant modi ations. Three levels of se urity are presented: Stati se urity (i.e.,
se urity against adversaries that orrupt parties only at the onset of the omputation), adaptive
se urity (where the adversary obtains only the long-term information of a newly orrupted party)
and strongly adaptive se urity where the adversary obtains all the private information of orrupted
parties. (Oddly, strongly adaptive se urity does not imply adaptive se urity.) In addition, two
de nitions based on the indistinguishability approa h of Bellare and Rogaway [7℄ are presented.
The rst is aimed at apturing se urity without perfe t forward se re y (PFS), and is shown
to be equivalent to the stati variant of the simulation-based de nition. The se ond is aimed
at apturing se urity with PFS, and is laimed to be equivalent to the adaptive variant of the
simulation-based de nition. SuÆ ien y of the de nitions to onstru ting se ure- hannel proto ols
is informally argued, but is not proved nor rigorously laimed.
     While the rst variant of the indistinguishability-based de nition is roughly equivalent to the
non-PFS variant presented here (modulo the general di eren es mentioned below), the se ond
variant is stri tly weaker than our PFS formulation of SK-se urity. Spe i ally, the de nition in
[43℄ a epts as se ure proto ols that do not erase sensitive ephemeral data (e.g. proto ol DHKE-1
in [43℄), while the de nition here treats these proto ols as inse ure.
     There are several other te hni al and methodologi al di eren es between the two works that we
mention next. (a) A major methodologi al di eren e is our use of the authenti ated-links model
and authenti ators as a simplifying analysis tool. While our formalization of se urity does not
mandate the use of this methodology we arefully build our de nitions to a ommodate the use
of this tool. (b) Shoup allows the adversary a more general atta k than session-key query, namely


                                                 44
an appli ation atta k that reveals an arbitrary fun tion of the key. Our modeling does not de ne
this expli it atta k as it is subsumed by the session-key query apability and, in parti ular, sin e
it is not ne essary for guaranteeing se ure hannels. ( ) Here we onsider an additional adversarial
behavior that is not treated in [43℄. Spe i ally, we prote t against adversaries that obtain the
internal state of orrupted sessions (even without fully orrupting the orresponding parties) by
requiring that su h exposure will not ompromise other proto ol sessions run by the same parties.
This prote tion is not guaranteed by some proto ols suggested in [43℄ (e.g., proto ol DHKE).
(d) The treatment of the intera tion with the erti ate authority (CA) in the ase of publi -key
based authenti ation. In [43℄ the intera tion with the CA is an integral part of every ke proto ol,
whereas here this intera tion with the CA is treated as a separate proto ol. We make this hoi e
for further modularity and ease of proof. Yet, as we already remarked in Se tion 2.2, the CA
proto ol needs to be taken into onsideration with any full spe i ation and analysis of a tual ke
proto ols. (e) The treatment of the session-id's. In [43℄ the session-id's are arti ially given to
the parties by the model whi h results, in our view, in a more umbersome formalization of the
se urity onditions. In ontrast, here we adopt a more natural approa h where the session-id's are
generated by the alling proto ol and se urity is guaranteed only when these session-id's satisfy
some minimal (and easy to implement) onditions. In parti ular, this formalism an be satis ed
by letting the parties jointly generate the session-id (as is ommon in pra ti e).
On the works of P tzmann, S hunter and Waidner [41, 40, 42℄ and Canetti [14℄. These
works provide general frameworks for studying the se urity of ryptographi proto ols in several
models of omputation, and prove some omposition theorems with respe t to proto ols that satisfy
their respe tive de nitions of se urity. The proposed frameworks are natural andidates for de ning
and studying se ure key-ex hange proto ols and their appli ation to providing se ure hannels. In
parti ular, Canetti [14℄ de nes se ure key ex hange proto ols, as well as proto ols for providing
\se ure sessions" within his framework, and uses his general omposition theorem in order to obtain
similar results as the ones provided here (i.e., that the standard use of ke proto ols for se uring
 ommuni ation sessions result in a good \se ure sessions" proto ol). The [14℄ de nition of se ure
ke proto ols implies the de nition here. However, it is somewhat over-restri tive, as it implies the
de nitions of both [2℄ and [43℄. (In parti ular, we do not know how to show that Proto ol en from
Se tion 5.3 satis es this de nition.) In [16℄ we investigate a relaxed version of the [14℄ de nition
of key ex hange, that is equivalent to the de nition here and at the same time enjoys the general
 omposability properties provided by the [14℄ framework.




                                                45
