A shortened version of this paper appears in the proceedings of the 44th Annual International Conference on the
Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques (Eurocrypt 2025). © IACR 2025. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-
91101-9_14. This is the full version.




                              Key Derivation Functions
                              Without a Grain of Salt
       Matilda Backendal1 , Sebastian Clermont2 , Marc Fischlin2 , and Felix Günther3
                1
                Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
           2
               Cryptoplexity, Technische Universität Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany
                     3
                       IBM Research Europe – Zurich, Rüschlikon, Switzerland
      mbackendal@inf.ethz.ch, {sebastian.clermont,marc.fischlin}@tu-darmstadt.de, mail@felixguenther.info



                                                 June 16, 2026


                                                     Abstract
           Key derivation functions (KDFs) are integral to many cryptographic protocols. Their functionality
       is to turn raw key material, such as a Diffie–Hellman secret, into a strong cryptographic key that
       is indistinguishable from random. This guarantee was formalized by Krawczyk together with the
       seminal introduction of HKDF (CRYPTO 2010), in a model where the KDF only takes a single
       key material input. Modern protocol designs, however, regularly need to combine multiple secrets,
       possibly even from different sources, with the guarantee that the derived key is secure as long as at
       least one of the inputs is good. This is particularly relevant in settings like hybrid key exchange for
       quantum-safe migration. Krawczyk’s KDF formalism does not capture this goal, and there has been
       surprisingly little work on the security considerations for KDFs since then.
           In this work, we thus revisit the syntax and security model for KDFs to treat multiple, possibly
       correlated inputs. Our syntax is assertive: We do away with salts, which are needed in theory to
       extract from arbitrary sources in the standard model, but in practice are almost never used (or even
       available), and sometimes even misused, as we argue. We use our new model to analyze real-world
       multi-input KDFs—in Signal’s X3DH protocol, ETSI’s TS 103 744 standard, and MLS’ combiner for
       pre-shared keys—as well as new constructions we introduce for specialized settings—e.g., a purely
       blockcipher-based one. We further discuss the importance of collision resistance for KDFs and finally
       apply our multi-input KDF model to show how hybrid KEM key exchange can be analyzed from a
       KDF perspective.


1      Introduction
Key derivation functions (KDFs) are a common ingredient of many cryptographic applications. They
operate as a versatile tool, taking highly entropic sources and generating an almost infinite amount of
strong cryptographic keys, potentially bound to some context. KDFs are used to derive keys in many
widely-used protocols such as TLS, IPsec, Bluetooth, or Signal. Several standards describe KDFs based
on common cryptographic algorithms and deployed in many widely-used protocols. At the forefront, this
includes the IETF RFC 5869 [45] for HKDF, based on the seminal work of Krawczyk [47] which describes
how HMAC can be used to build a KDF. Equally important are NIST’s special publications concerning
KDFs, notably SP800-56C [5] on key derivation in key establishment schemes, in particular using hash
functions, HMAC, and KMAC, as well as SP800-108 [23] concerning KDFs based on pseudorandom
functions like HMAC, CMAC, and the hash function SHA-3.

1.1      State-of-the-Art KDFs
HKDF and the extract-then-expand paradigm. The most commonly used key derivation function
in practice is arguably the HMAC-based function HKDF, proposed by Krawczyk at CRYPTO 2010 [47]
and subsequently standardized by the IETF in RFC 5869 [45]. HKDF follows the extract-then-expand
(XtX) paradigm, also by Krawczyk, which suggests that key derivation functions should operate in two


                                                         1
stages: The first stage extracts uniform randomness from the (entropic, but not necessarily uniform)
input key material, generating an intermediate pseudorandom key PRK. The second stage takes the
key PRK and expands it using a variable-output-length PRF to generate a key of the desired length.
    In the case of HKDF, the extract (HKDF.Extract) and expand (HKDF.Expand) modules are both based
on HMAC [8]. HMAC : {0, 1}∗ × {0, 1}∗ → {0, 1}8hl , as standardized in [44, 52], takes an arbitrary-length
key K ∈ {0, 1}∗ and input x ∈ {0, 1}∗ and applies a (nested) computation of a Merkle–Damgård hash
function H : {0, 1}∗ → {0, 1}8hl to obtain an hl-byte output.1 The extract function HKDF.Extract is
defined as
                                  HKDF.Extract(S, σ) := HMAC(S, σ),
where σ is the source key material and S is a salt value. The output is a pseudorandom key PRK of
length hl. The expansion function HKDF.Expand takes as input PRK, a label L for the derived key, and
an output length ℓ as a value up to 255 · hl. The evaluation HKDF.Expand(PRK, L, ℓ) iterates HMAC,
computing

                   T (0) ← ε,
                   T (i) ← HMAC(PRK, T (i − 1)||L|| [i]1 )        for i = 1, 2, . . . , N = ⌈ℓ/hl⌉.

The counter value i is encoded as a single byte, allowing at most 255 iterations. The procedure eventually
outputs the first ℓ bytes of T (1)∥T (2)∥ . . . ∥T (N ). Finally, HKDF is defined as HKDF(σ, S, L, ℓ) :=
HKDF.Expand(HKDF.Extract(S, σ), L, ℓ).
Extendable output, or not. Note that the output length parameter ℓ does not enter the HMAC
calls but only determines how the T (i) values are truncated. This means that HKDF is a so-called
extendable-output function (XOF). That is, if one fixes the inputs σ, L, S, then the output for some length
parameter ℓ1 is a prefix of the output for length parameter ℓ2 ≥ ℓ1 . We call this type of KDF a XOF-KDF
to distinguish it from KDFs that produce independent keys for distinct length parameters (which we
instead refer to as not output-extendable, NOF-KDFs); we treat both types in this work.
Single-input KDF syntax and security. Together with the design of HKDF and the XtX paradigm,
Krawczyk also formalized the syntax of a key derivation function and established its expected security.
As can be seen in the function signature of HKDF, a (single-input) KDF in Krawczyk’s syntax takes as
input the raw key material σ generated by some randomness source Σ, a salt S used for smoothing the
raw key material, a label L binding key-related information (and possibly context about the input key
material) to the derived key, and finally the desired output length ℓ:

                                              K ← KDF(σ, S, L, ℓ).

For example, σ could be a Diffie–Hellman secret, S some independent random nonce, and L a string like
"c hs traffic" or "c ap traffic" as used in TLS 1.3 [56] for computing the client handshake resp.
application traffic secret.
    Krawczyk’s security model in [47] considers an indistinguishability game in which the adversary has
oracle access to a single KDF instance for random, but fixed, key material σ and salt S, on labels L and
length ℓ values of its choice. That is, the game samples σ and S, and the adversary can then adaptively
query KDF(σ, S, ·, ·) on arbitrary label L and length ℓ and learn the derived key. For a single challenge
query on a label distinct from those in all prior and later queries, the adversary either gets the real KDF
value on the chosen inputs or a random string of the requested length and has to distinguish which it is.
Key combiners. Following Krawczyk’s initial work, most formalizations of KDFs—including stan-
dards [23, 45]—cover single-input KDFs: the KDF takes a single key material input σ to derive the key.
In practice, however, many protocols deal with multiple key material inputs σ1 , . . . , σn when deriving
keys, possibly from different sources. This includes the Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocol in
version 1.3 [56], where cryptographic keys may be derived by combining a pre-shared key (established in a
previous connection) and a fresh Diffie–Hellman (DH) secret. Similarly, Signal’s X3DH key exchange [49]
derives its key from three to four correlated DH secrets computed from several ephemeral and static DH
shares. In the Messaging Layer Security (MLS) protocol [6], an arbitrary number n of pre-shared keys
can be injected into the key schedule (e.g., to add entropy or authenticate members of prior epochs) and
for that purpose are first combined into a single key value using HKDF extraction and expansion.
    Combining keys in this fashion aims to achieve security for the derived keys as long as at least one
input key is secure. Yet, no existing formalism for KDFs with multiple key material inputs captures
  1 HKDF and HMAC interpret lengths in bytes (octets), hence the factor 8 here.




                                                          2
this security goal. Hence, all of these protocols resort to using a single-input KDF, applied either to the
concatenation σ1 , . . . , σn of the key material inputs or by repeatedly feeding key material into both the
salt and key input in a chaining fashion. Since neither of these approaches follows the intended usage of
the KDF, each construction necessitates a tailored security analysis, and a formal definition of the joint
security goal remains lacking.
    The need for a thorough formal understanding of multi-input KDFs becomes even more pressing
with the quantum-safe transition and the increasing deployment of hybrid protocols that combine keys
from classical and post-quantum schemes. Advancements in quantum key distribution (QKD) may
further increase the urgency, as a hybrid deployment of QKD with both post-quantum and classical key
exchange protocols might be desirable for risk-hedging purposes. This development is accompanied by
the appearance of the first standards on KDFs for these new scenarios, such as TS 103 744 [35, 36] of
the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI), which so far lack a matching, formal
definition.
    This is the gap that we aim to fill. We begin by defining the syntax and security of multi-input
KDFs, thereby providing a formal underpinning for the key combiners appearing in deployed systems
and recent standards. We use our definition to analyze these practical constructions, providing proofs
and exposing shortcomings, and devise new constructions targeting dedicated usage scenarios. Finally,
looking at applications, we discuss how the security of a hybrid key exchange can be viewed through the
lens of multi-input KDFs.

1.2     Our Contributions
Multi-input KDFs. Our first contribution is to extend the syntax of a KDF. Instead of only taking
a single key material input, a KDF now accepts n key material inputs {σi }i∈[1,n] , each associated with
some context information ci .2 We call such a function an “n-KDF”, to highlight the multiple inputs. As
before, an n-KDF also takes a label L and a length parameter ℓ specifying the intended usage and desired
length of the derived key, respectively:
                                       K ← n-KDF((σ1 , c1 ), . . . , (σn , cn ), L, ℓ).
    Note that for single-input KDFs, the distinction between the context information c and the label L is
often blurred. Some standards, like NIST SP800-108 [23], make both explicit, but then simply concatenate
c and L in all proposed constructions. RFC 5869 [45], in contrast, specifies HKDF only with an info field
for capturing both context and label data, following [47]. For n-KDFs, the separation between context
and label is clearer: context is associated with the individual source key material, hence, there are n
separate such inputs. The label L is instead associated with the derived key; therefore, there is only a
single such input regardless of the value of n.
    The attentive reader will have noticed the absence of salt in the inputs to the n-KDF. This is on
purpose and our second contribution to the syntax of KDFs. As it turns out, almost without exception,
practical approaches to building multi-input KDFs—as well as applications of single-input KDFs—do not
use salts at all. Instead, if a single-input KDF is used as a building block, the salt input field is simply
populated with a fixed constant, or one of the multiple key inputs. For some prominent examples, we refer
to Hybrid Public-Key Encryption (HPKE) [7], iMessage PQ3 [62], MLS [6], Noise [53], Signal’s X3DH [49]
and PQXDH [48] handshakes, TLS 1.3 [56] and its hybrid key exchange draft [63], and XWing [4].3 This
is not due to ignorance of the concepts of salts in extractor theory, but due to practical limitations. A
random and independent salt can be unavailable, primarily due to latency or communication constraints.
In these cases demanding a salt input may be outright dangerous: The multi-input KDF construction
suggested by ETSI in version 1.1.1 of TS 103 744 [35] turns out to be insecure when used as a general
KDF without restrictions, due to a misuse of labels as salts.
    In some multi-input KDFs, extraction is handled in a separate step (e.g., via privacy amplification of
a reconciled key in QKD) before inputs are combined. In either case, salts, in practice, are not used in
the construction or for security of multi-input KDFs, so we take this opportunity to remove them. This
both simplifies the syntax and exposes the true security achieved by practical constructions.
Security model. The goal of a multi-input KDF remains similar to that of a single-input KDF: to
generate keys of the desired length, which are computationally indistinguishable from random. In
   2 Context here refers to information associated to the generation of the source key material, such as public parameters or

the transcript of a key exchange. Generally, including as much context as possible in the KDF evaluation is advisable.
   3 Indeed, the only example of a widely deployed protocol actually using salts in a KDF is the Internet Key Exchange

(IKE) version 2 protocol [42] underlying IPsec.


                                                              3
contrast to single-input KDFs, this guarantee is now extended to encompass keys derived from partially
adversarially-controlled inputs. A secure n-KDF combines the entropy of the inputs and returns a key
that is indistinguishable from random as long as one of the n key material inputs is unknown to the
adversary.
    In our new KDF security notion (Section 4), we capture this by distinguishing between “honest” key
material inputs, which contain entropy, and “dishonest” inputs chosen by the adversary. The adversary
can ask to see multiple challenge outputs of the n-KDF, for chosen labels L and output lengths ℓ,
and should not be able to distinguish the outputs from random, under the condition that in each key
derivation, at least one key material input is honest. The adversary may also ask for real outputs from the
KDF—however, we show that this does not add to security; the notions with and without such queries
are logically and tightly equivalent. Our model further distinguishes between extendable (XOF) and
non-extendable (NOF) output KDFs, capturing the expected security for both types, via appropriate
query restrictions.
    The honest key material inputs, also referred to as “secrets”, are generated by a collection Σ of
sources, where each source Σi ∈ Σ outputs a vector of potentially correlated secrets σi with some context
information ci , as well as some leakage information αi which is handed to the adversary. This allows us
to consider, for example, related Diffie–Hellman secrets g xi xj , arising from pairwise combinations from a
collection of DH shares {g x1 , . . . , g xn }.
Analysis of real-world proposals. We then turn to study real-world constructions of multi-input
KDFs in our security model in Section 5. To illustrate the versatility of our model, we study three
constructions with distinct internal designs, input key material settings, and output behaviors.
    The first construction captures the approach used in MLS [6] to combine a sequence of n pre-shared
keys into one, fixed-length key. This scheme, which we call MLS-PSK-KDF, uses a chain of HKDF
extraction and expansion steps. We show that it is a secure n-KDF in our model when used to combine
uniform pre-shared keys. The proof only relies on the standard-model assumptions that HMAC (underlying
HKDF) is a dual-PRF [3] and collision resistant.
    The second construction, which we call ETSI-CatKDF, is proposed by ETSI in their TS 103 744
standard—of which we analyze version 1.1.1 [35]. ETSI-CatKDF concatenates the key material inputs
and applies HKDF to derive multiple keys (XOF style). We first identify that this proposal is insecure
when used as a general, unrestricted KDF in the sense of our model. The reason is a misuse of labels as
salt inputs to the extraction step HKDF.Extract, allowing an adversary to produce identical outputs by
choosing different labels appropriately. If we restrict the choice of labels and assume that all key material
inputs have fixed length—which the standard does not enforce in version 1.1.1—then we can prove
ETSI-CatKDF secure as a XOF-KDF, modeling HMAC as a random oracle [32]. Notably, the recently
published version 1.2.1 of the standard [36] restricts the choice of labels; a similar revision is under
consideration for version 1.1.1 [35] following discussions of our results with ETSI. Furthermore, the key
material from hybrid key exchanges targeted by ETSI TS 103 744 is fixed-length in nature. Arguably, the
ETSI design could be strengthened to achieve general-purpose multi-input KDF security. Instead, the
revised version 1.2.1 restricts ETSI-CatKDF to 2 + 1 key inputs (compared of n + 1 in version 1.1.1, to
which our analysis pertains), barring it from use as a general purpose n-KDF.
    The third construction, used in Signal’s X3DH [49] key exchange, derives a single key from 3 or 4
correlated Diffie–Hellman secrets using (plain) concatenation without context and HKDF. We show
that the corresponding X3DH-KDF scheme is a secure 4-KDF (with the fourth key material input being
optional) via a somewhat lossy reduction to the security of the underlying correlated Diffie–Hellman
source, modeling HMAC as a random oracle. Notably, we can show that the loss in the reduction could
be reduced significantly if X3DH-KDF were to include context (i.e., the involved DH public keys) in the
key derivation—which it currently does not.4
The Combine-then-Expand paradigm. From our analyses of real-world constructions of multi-input
KDFs, a general pattern emerges. We call it the “Combine-then-Expand” (CtX) paradigm, where—in
accordance with existing designs—the extract step is replaced by a generic combine step, which may
or may not involve extraction. CtX can be seen as a counterpart to the Extract-then-Expand (XtX)
paradigm for multiple inputs. In brief, the CtX paradigm constructs an n-KDF as follows, illustrated in
Figure 1: First, the source key material and context is combined into a single, fixed-length, pseudorandom
key PRK via a Combine function. Then, PRK is used to key an Expand function, taking the label L and
desired output length ℓ as input to produce the output key K.
   4 This has been assumed in a tight security analysis of a variant of X3DH by Kiltz et al. [43] and was suggested for

independent reasons in analyses of Signal’s post-quantum extension PQXDH [11, 37].



                                                          4
                                                            n-KDF
                                             comb-KDF                      vol-PRF

                             (σ1 , c1 )
                                ..                                          Expand
                                 .           Combine          PRK                           K
                             (σn , cn )

                                    L, ℓ
              (optional: c1 , . . . , cn )


Figure 1: Combine-then-Expand (CtX) paradigm for building an n-KDF from a comb-KDF Combine
(with empty label and fixed output length) and a variable–output-length PRF Expand.

    In Section 6 we show that the CtX paradigm yields a secure n-KDF if the Combine function is a
secure “combiner n-KDF” (comb-KDF) with fixed, empty label and fixed output length |PRK| and the
Expand function is a secure variable-output-length PRF. Observing that a comb-KDF with empty label
and fixed output length is a notably simpler object to construct (given that it has only to produce a
single, fixed-length output key), the CtX paradigm provides a blueprint for constructing multi-input
KDFs from simpler building blocks. In particular, candidate variable-output-length PRFs for the Expand
step readily exist, with HKDF.Expand being a prime example that practical constructions already use in
this paradigm.
New constructions. Equipped with the CtX paradigm, we give new constructions of multi-input
KDFs for specialized settings in Section 7. So far, the proposed n-KDFs we studied are exclusively based
on hash functions. Yet, for single-input KDFs, standards also specify blockcipher-based constructions [23].
Accordingly, we propose an n-KDF that is purely based on a blockcipher BC such as AES. Besides the
pseudorandomness of BC, we also require BC to be key-collision resistant, meaning that it is infeasible to
find keys k ̸= k ′ and an input x such that BC(k, x) = BC(k ′ , x). Inspired by the CtX paradigm, we show
that these two properties suffice to combine multiple keys into a single one (without touching context
information or labels yet). Running a variable-output-length PRF (e.g., the CMAC-based construction by
NIST [23]) on this merged key (now including context and label) yields a secure, fully blockcipher-based
multi-input KDF.
    We also look into the combination of computationally secure key material with information-theoretically
secure key material. The need for such a combiner arises, for example, to combine a quantum key
distribution protocol with classical and/or post-quantum key exchange. The resulting key should inherit
the information-theoretic security if the corresponding input source is, in fact, information-theoretically
secure. Likewise, it should provide computational security if one of the other sources is computationally
secure or if the “information-theoretic” source merely provides computational security. We show that
combining key material from all sources into a multi-input KDF and then adding another portion of the
alleged information-theoretic source to the output provides this feature.
Collision resistance as a feature. We argue (and discuss in detail in Appendix E) that, ideally,
KDFs should also be collision resistant. This means that even if the adversary has full control over the
inputs to the KDF (i.e., we allow all inputs to be maliciously chosen), it should be hard to find two inputs
for which the KDF output collides. Note that the pseudorandomness of the KDF does not guarantee this
because the adversary fully determines the key material when attempting to produce a collision.
     Collision resistance is sometimes explicitly mentioned in standards (e.g., in TLS 1.3 [56]) and in
scientific works (e.g., in [18]) as a requirement for KDFs. We revisit the example of unknown key share
(UKS) attacks on key exchange protocols [14] and how they can be easily prevented if the underlying
KDF is collision resistant.
     One may think that HKDF, i.e., HMAC, is collision-resistant if the underlying hash function is. The
nuisance in HMAC, however, lies in the initial processing of the input key, which is padded with 0 bytes
(if too short) or first hashed (if too long). This means HKDF is not collision-resistant for arbitrary inputs,
but only with appropriate restrictions, which—as seen for the ETSI-CatKDF construction—can lead to
insecurities if neglected. We stress that this appears to be widely known among practitioners; here, we
simply show what it means for constructions and how to avoid the potential pitfalls. In particular, we
discuss the constructions we analyze. To give evidence that this property is not achieved in general,
especially for blockcipher-based constructions, we look at the CMAC-based single-input KDF in Bluetooth


                                                        5
Low Energy [15] and show that it is not collision-resistant.
Application. We finally illustrate how our security notion of KDFs can facilitate the analysis of higher-
level protocols. In Section 8, we demonstrate this with the example of a KEM+KEM-combiner key
exchange protocol and security against passive adversaries, where the parties combine keys from one
ephemeral and one static KEM. This is used, for example, to build a hybrid combiner of a classically
secure and a post-quantum secure KEM. Ultimately, the key exchange steps can be considered to be the
means to derive key material, and we are only interested in the KDF eventually putting the two keys
together. It is therefore natural to look at the security of the protocol from the angle of the KDF (instead
of the KEMs as in, say, [13]); the key exchange protocol data only enters via the context information
for the KDF. We show that the key exchange security of the combiner indeed immediately follows from
KDF security when the KEMs constitute secure sources. We leave it to future work to apply our model
to more complex protocols and to consider active security.

1.3    Related Work
As mentioned above, key derivation with multiple inputs is common in practice, often as part of complex
protocols. One of the most prominent examples of multi-input key derivation is the latest TLS 1.3
standard [56], combining a pre-shared key psk with a DH secret to derive multiple session keys. The key
schedule in TLS 1.3 uses HKDF and can be seen as an example of a 2-KDF. It has been cryptographically
analyzed, explicitly or implicitly, in several works [33, 30, 28, 27, 19]. The results usually model the
underlying hash function as a random oracle, but also rely on the dual-PRF security of HMAC—which
was only recently studied by Backendal et al. [3].
    In secure messaging, Signal’s X3DH key exchange protocol [49] derives a key from several (correlated)
Diffie–Hellman secrets, basically using concatenation to combine the secrets. Signal’s X3DH KDF has
been analyzed as part of the Signal protocol by Cohn-Gordon et al. [25] in the random oracle model.
Post-quantum versions of Signal’s X3DH appear in [17, 31, 16]. Signal also introduced a post-quantum
key exchange PQXDH [48], adding a KEM shared secret to the DH secrets of X3DH as input for key
derivation, which was analyzed in [11, 37]. An analysis of hybrid solutions of Perrin’s Noise framework as
a full channel protocol appears in [1]. The post-quantum hybrid version of the Noise-inspired WireGuard
protocol has been analyzed by Hülsing et al. [40] as a key exchange protocol, relying on the dual-PRF
security of the key derivation function.
    The Messaging Layer Security (MLS) protocol [6] also uses HKDF-based combiners to derive keys from
multiple inputs. Brzuska et al. [18] provide an analysis of the key scheduling. Brzuska and Winkelmann
(BW) [20] consider multi-input pseudorandom functions (n-PRFs) as key combiners in the context of
MLS. While being related to multi-input KDFs, there are significant differences. The goal of n-PRFs is to
combine several (pseudo)random keys in a robust way. In contrast, multi-input KDFs target arbitrary
and even correlated sources. Notably, while n-PRFs take context inputs, these are required to be unique,
while key material (and contexts) may be reused in a multi-input KDF. BW give a construction called
NPRF based on HMAC, which computes the xor of PRF outputs for each (extracted) key and the unique
context information. A similar proposal with a comparable goal appears in a recent work by Aviram et
al. [2]. We note that BW [20] mention collision resistance as a desirable goal for multi-input PRFs and
argue, based on the collision-resistance of HMAC, that their enhanced construction crNPRF achieves this
property.
    Password-based key derivation functions such as PBKDF2 [41] need to process low-entropic inputs,
in contrast to the sources we consider here. This introduces special requirements for the design of such
schemes, e.g., impeding exhaustive searches. While our approach is, in principle, applicable to this setting
as well, the constructions are usually fundamentally different. We note that Nair and Song [51] recently
considered multi-factor key derivation protocols based on Krawczyk’s KDF framework. Although their
protocols are also called key derivation functions, they are located at a higher abstraction level, aiming
to be able to deal with lost secrets and, therefore, requiring some form of setup steps. Indeed, their
constructions themselves apply (password-based) KDFs. Furthermore, they were recently shown to have
severe vulnerabilities [58].
    Combiners for key encapsulation mechanisms (KEMs) have been considered in [39, 13, 34, 54]. Bindel
et al. [13] consider several suggestions close to the TLS 1.3 key scheduling and its hybrid key exchange
draft [63], Schwabe et al. [59, 60] and Celi et al. [22] analogously investigate the combiner used in
KEMTLS. Campagna and Petcher [21] investigated the security of the key derivation functions proposed
by ETSI from a hybrid KEM viewpoint. All these results refer to security from a KEM perspective, via
IND-CPA/CCA type games. We, in contrast, are interested in the security of the key derivation step itself


                                                     6
for general key material sources, multiple challenge queries, and applications of derived keys. Indeed, our
application to a KEM+KEM-combiner key exchange protocol (see Section 8) is an example of analyzing
a hybrid (KEM) key exchange through the lens of (multi-input) KDFs rather than KEM combiners.


2     Notation and Conventions
As is common in standards, we sometimes work with bytes (octets) instead of bits as atomic values. We
denote by O = {0x00, . . . , 0xFF} the set of all possible values of an octet, in hexadecimal form. To capture
both bit-oriented as well as octet-oriented settings simultaneously, we sometimes use B for the underlying
character set, with the understanding that B = {0, 1} for bit strings and B = O for byte strings.
    For a string a ∈ B∗ we denote by |a| its length (in B characters) and by a[i] and a[i..j] the characters
at position i, resp. i through j (inclusive), starting with index 1; if i > j then a[i..j] denotes the empty
string ε. We write a1 ≼ a2 for a1 being a prefix of a2 . The symbol ∥ denotes string concatenation and we
write an = a∥ . . . ∥a for the n-fold repetition of a string a. We write a = [x]n for the canonical big-endian
encoding of integer x < 2n with a fixed number |a| = n of B characters. We denote by ⟨x, y⟩ an injective
encoding of strings which ensures that, if x ̸= x′ or y ̸= y ′ , then ⟨x, y⟩ ̸= ⟨x′ , y ′ ⟩.
    For i ∈ N, [i] denotes the set {1, . . . , i}. For a vector x, usually written in boldface, |x| denotes its
length and for i ∈ [|x|], x[i] or xi denotes the ith element. By x ←$ S we denote sampling an element
uniformly at random from S and assigning it to x. Similarly, we write X ←$ X to indicate sampling
a random variable X from a probability distribution X . By [[cond]] we denote the boolean result of
evaluating cond.
    The distinguished symbol ⊥ is used as a placeholder value for uninitialized variables and to signal
errors. Unless otherwise defined, sets, strings, counters, and boolean variables are assumed to be initialized
to the empty set ∅, the empty string ε, the value 0, and 0 (where 0 identifies the Boolean value for false),
respectively. Vectors—we often use the term tables synonymously—such as a[·] are initialized to ⊥ in all
positions. We follow an object-oriented approach to read and write vector entries. That is, for vector a
we denote by a[i].x the value of entry a[i] at attribute x. Likewise, a[i].x ← x denotes the assignment
of variable x to attribute x of the ith entry in a (where we often use identical variable and attribute
names). We also use a[i].(x,y,z) to read all entries x, y, z at once and the notation a[i].(x,y,z) ← (x, y, z)
as shortcut for the simultaneous assignment. We use (query) lists Q to store queries, adding element
(x, y, z) to the initially empty list via Q.append(x, y, z). The ith element is denoted Q[i]. We denote by
Q1 ||Q2 the concatenation of two lists.
    We use the game-playing framework of [10]. By GSec-d    S   (A), we denote running the game for security
experiment Sec, parameterized by scheme S and (optionally) bit d ∈ {0, 1}, with adversary A. Games
have procedures, also called oracles. Both adversaries and oracles are algorithms. Unless otherwise
indicated, we assume that all algorithms implicitly perform formatting checks on any input they receive
and halt and return ⊥ if the inputs are not well-formed or fall outside the algorithm’s domain. In games,
there may be an initialization procedure Initialize and a finalization procedure Finalize. If oracles
Initialize or Finalize are present, only one query to each is allowed, and this must be the first resp.
last query the adversary makes. The output of the game execution is defined as the output of Finalize
if the latter is present and the output of the adversary otherwise. By G(A) ⇒ y we denote the event that
the execution of game G with adversary A results in output y. We associate the boolean values true to 1
and false to 0 and write Pr[G(A)] as shorthand for Pr[G(A) ⇒ 1], the probability that the execution
returns 1.


3     Key Material Sources
The security of a key produced by a key derivation function inevitably depends on the amount of entropy
in the source(s) from which the inputs are drawn. Here, we recall the definition of a key material source,
introduce the concept of a source collection, and give measures of source security. Further relevant
background definitions are in Appendix A.
Key material sources. In the following, we will be concerned with different kinds of sources that
provide the raw input key material to the key derivation functions. We will assume that the sources
generate key material with high entropy, but not necessarily that this source key material is unbiased and
independent. In particular, we want a definition that is general enough to cover the most common types
of “secrets” used for key derivation in cryptographic applications. This includes (in order of decreasing
expected entropy): information-theoretically secure QKD keys, computationally secure uniform keys,


                                                      7
shared keys from Diffie–Hellman key exchange with high computational min-entropy, and passphrases or
passwords from some distribution with low guessing probability. The latter two examples in particular
illustrate the need to cover sources which generate correlated secrets; in a Diffie–Hellman protocol, the
public key of user A can be used to exchange keys with multiple other users, generating a set of shared keys
that are all correlated, and in the password setting, users are known to choose highly correlated secrets.
    We adapt the definition of a source of key material from Krawczyk’s HKDF paper [47] to also
encompass sources of correlated key material, as follows. A source Σ samples a vector of tuples, (σ, c, α),
where each tuple consists of “secret” key material σ ∈ Skm, context information c ∈ Ctx about the
generated secret, and auxiliary information α ∈ Aux (which is assumed to be available to the adversary as
leakage). As a convention, the auxiliary information always includes the context, meaning that the context
is also publicly known. The distinction between context and leakage is that context is provided as input to
the key derivation function, whereas leakage is given to the adversary. As such, the auxiliary information
may contain more information than just the context, as long as it does not leak information about the
secret key material that would allow an adversary to mount trivial attacks on the underlying source.
    To illustrate the difference between context and auxiliary information, consider a simple Diffie–Hellman
key exchange in which the parties exchange shares g x and g y and use σ = g xy as the key material. The
context information c could be empty according to the protocol specification; this is for example the
approach taken by Signal [49] in the multi-input setting. However, the adversary would nonetheless learn
the auxiliary data α = (g x , g y ), reflecting the information observed in the key exchange.5
Definition 1 (Key material source). A source of key material (or, simply, source) Σ is a correlated
probability distribution over a support set Skm × Ctx × Aux which is generated by an efficient probabilistic
algorithm that we will also refer to as Σ. Associated with Σ is an integer parameter u called the sample
size, such that when called, Σ outputs a vector z of length u, where each element consists of a triple
(σ, c, α) ∈ Skm × Ctx × Aux. We assume that c is contained in α. That is, for each (σ, c, α) ∈ z, there
exists an efficient way of extracting c from α.
   The notion of key material sources is purposefully generic and allows for a wide range of instantiations.
Let us consider some illustrating examples.
Uniform keys. For a source of uniform keys of length ℓ, the sampler Σ returns a vector of uniformly
     chosen strings in {0, 1}ℓ , with context and auxiliary information being empty (or possibly including
     some public identifier for the key material). This models key generation for cryptographic primitives
    with uniformly distributed fix-length keys. In practice, this could capture pre-shared keys or the
     usage of a QKD scheme.
KEMs. A source can also capture the shared secrets established by a key encapsulation mechanism
   KEM = (KGen, Encaps, Decaps). Here, each element in z is a tuple (K, ⟨pk, C⟩, α), where (pk, sk)
    ←$ KEM.KGen() is a key pair and K is the result of an encapsulation (C, K) ←$ KEM.Encaps(pk).
   That is, the secret key material is the KEM secret K and the context is an encoding of the KEM
   public key and ciphertext ⟨pk, C⟩. Recall that, as per our definition, this context is also included in
   the auxiliary information α.
Diffie–Hellman. To model a Diffie–Hellman key exchange protocol, the source key material might be a
      distribution over the group G of prime order p with an associated generator g. Here, each element
      in the key material vector has the form (g xy , ⟨G, p, g, g x , g y ⟩, α), where x, y ∈ Z∗p . That is, the
      secret key material is the Diffie–Hellman secret and the context information is an encoding of the
      group, its order, the generator, and the DH shares; per definition, this context is also included in α.
    In some source distributions the secrets σ in the vector z ←$ Σ may be correlated. This is the case if,
for example, the same Diffie–Hellman or KEM public key is used to establish multiple secrets. We assume
that the distribution is public, and hence that such correlation patterns are known to the adversary. For
example, for the Diffie–Hellman source capturing the inputs to Signal’s KDF in X3DH, the vector z
contains all pairwise combinations of users’ long-term/static and ephemeral Diffie–Hellman public keys
(see Section 5.4 for details). We then assume that the adversary knows which elements in z are associated
with the public key of each user, without having to first inspect the context information of each secret.
Source collections. We define security of key derivation functions with respect to the key material
sources that provide the inputs to the KDF. That is, the game that defines security of an n-input KDF
(n-KDF) will be parameterized by a collection of sources, Σ, from which the inputs are drawn.
   5 Other protocols like TLS 1.3 put the data of the key exchange in c such that it is immediately available to the adversary

by our assumption that α includes c.


                                                              8
          Game Gup                                                 Game Gpr -d :
                Σ :                                                      Σ

          Initialize()                                             Initialize()
           1 z ←$ Σ                                                 1 z ←$ Σ
           2 win ← 0                                                2 If d = 0:
           3 If ∃i ̸= j ∈ [u] : z[i].σ = z[j].σ                     3    For i = 1 to u:
           4    then win ← 1                                        4      z[i].σ ←$ {0, 1}|z[i].σ |
                No trivially correlated secrets                     5 Return z
           5 Return (win, z[1].α , . . . , z[u].α )
                Recall that c is part of α

          Predict(i, σ ∗ )                       Finalize()
                                  ∗
           6   win ← [[z[i].σ = σ ]]              8   Return win
           7   Return win


Figure 2: Games defining multi-challenge unpredictability (left) and pseudorandomness (right) of a
source Σ.


    To accommodate that correlated secrets from the same source may be used across multiple input
positions in the KDF, we associate to the source collection a surjective function Σ-map : [n] → [r] which
maps an integer representing the position of a KDF input to an index of a source in the collection of
r sources. That is, an (n, r)-source collection maps the n input positions of an n-KDF to the r sources,
such that each position in the KDF is assigned exactly one source. We define the mapping Σ-map to be
surjective to ensure that we only consider sources which contribute to the key derivation process.
    Consider, for example, a collection Σ = (Σ1 , Σ2 ) consisting of a source Σ1 outputting a vector of
Diffie-Hellman shares and a source Σ2 generating a vector of random keys representing ephemeral KEM
shares. Then a 2-KDF which expects the DH secrets as the first input and the KEM values at the second
position has Σ-map(1) = 1 and Σ-map(2) = 2.
Definition 2 (Source collection). An (n, r)-source collection Σ = (Σ1 , . . . , Σr ) is a tuple of r ≤ n sources
with an associated surjective function Σ-map : [n] → [r].
   Note that the sources Σi of a collection Σ = (Σ1 , . . . , Σr ) are considered to be independent, meaning
that one can sample each source individually. Correlations of key material, as in the Diffie–Hellman
example of sampling related secrets σi = g xyi for the same share g x are captured within a single source.
Maliciously chosen key material is later dealt with in our security model by giving the adversary the
possibility to set key inputs for the KDF.
Entropy measures. In order to quantify the security that a KDF provides with respect to a source
collection, we need a measure of the amount of entropy provided by the sources. In particular, due to the
leakage of the auxiliary information to the adversary, we measure the unpredictability of the secrets in a
sample given this leakage.
    We use a game-based approach to define source unpredictability. In the game, shown in Figure 2,
a vector z of key material is sampled according to the source Σ. The predictor receives the auxiliary
data for z and can make multiple attempts to guess a secret σi in the vector via an oracle Predict,
winning if at least one attempt is correct. To capture cases where the secrets are trivially correlated due
to being identical, we let the adversary immediately win if identical secrets occur in the sample. If the
predictor A is unbounded, the advantage measures the statistical unpredictability of the source; if A is
computationally bounded, it measures the computational source unpredictability.
Definition 3 (Unpredictable source). We define the advantage of an adversary A against the unpre-
dictability of a key material source Σ to be

                                          Advup            up
                                             Σ (A) = Pr [ GΣ (A) ⇒ 1 ] ,

where game GupΣ is given in Figure 2. We say that Σ is (t, ε)-computationally unpredictable if for any
adversary running in time at most t we have Advup
                                               Σ (A) ≤ ε.

   Sometimes we can make stronger assumptions about the key material sources than unpredictability.
For example, when the secrets are generated by a KEM, the IND-CPA-security of the KEM implies that


                                                              9
the key material not only has high entropy but is pseudorandom. That is, each secret generated by the
source is computationally indistinguishable from a uniformly random string of some fixed length. We
refer to this type of source as a pseudorandom source and show in Appendix A.3 that pseudorandom
sources are also unpredictable.

Definition 4 (Pseudorandom source). Let Σ be a key material source. We define the advantage of an
adversary A against the pseudorandomness of Σ to be
                                             pr-1                pr-0
                                          h           i      h            i
                           Advpr
                               Σ (A) = Pr   GΣ    (A)   − Pr   G Σ    (A)   ,

where game Gpr  -d is given in Figure 2. We say that the source Σ is (t, ε)-pseudorandom if for any
              Σ
adversary running in time at most t we have Advpr
                                               Σ (A) ≤ ε.



4     Multi-Input Key Derivation Functions
In this section, we define multi-input key derivation functions and their security.

4.1    Syntax
An n-KDF extends the basic notion of a KDF by taking up to n key material inputs σi ∈ Skmi together
with the context information ci ∈ Ctxi of each input (cf. Definition 1). Syntactically, an n-KDF always
has a fixed number n of inputs. However, our definition also supports optional inputs by letting ⊥ ∈ Skmi ,
where ⊥ is a distinguished symbol denoting that this input is null. In addition to the source key material
and their contexts, the n-KDF takes a label L ∈ Lbls for the output key and a parameter ℓ ∈ KLout
declaring the desired key output length. Here, the length may be denoted in bits or in octets. Recall that
we use B as the generic character set, capturing both bits B = {0, 1} and octets B = O.

Definition 5 (Key derivation function). An n-input key derivation function (n-KDF) F : (Skm1 × Ctx1 ) ×
. . . × (Skmn × Ctxn ) × Lbls × KLout → B∗ is a deterministic algorithm with an associated key output
length set KLout ⊆ N. Via K ← F((σ1 , c1 ), . . . , (σn , cn ), L, ℓ), algorithm F on input n tuples of secrets and
associated contexts, a label string L and an output length ℓ ∈ KLout outputs a key K ∈ Bℓ .
      We call an n-KDF with fixed, empty label and fixed output length (i.e., Lbls = {ε} and KLout = {ℓ})
a “combiner n-KDF” (comb-KDF).
Just like for single-input KDFs, an n-KDF can be an extendable output function (XOF), meaning that
for two derivations which only differ in the length input, the output of shorter length will be a prefix of
the longer output. We call a KDF which does not exhibit this property non-extendable output function
(NOF). The formal definitions of XOF and NOF n-KDFs are in Appendix B.

4.2    Security
We define the security notion for an n-KDF F through the real-or-random indistinguishability game
     -d
  F,Σ,req shown in Figure 3. The game is parameterized by a bit d ∈ {0, 1}, a source collection Σ, and a
Gkdf
predicate req which helps to exclude trivial attacks, such as challenge queries for dishonest keys only. For
comb-KDFs, the empty label and fixed output length (in gray boxes) can essentially be ignored; we call
this simplified notion “fixed-label-and-length” (fixLℓ-kdf) security.
    The game’s parameter d determines the setting, with d = 1 indicating the “real” game and d = 0
the “random” game, the source collection Σ determines which key material sources may be used in
which position of the KDF, and the predicate req determines the requirements on queries made by the
adversary. We list possible requirements in Table 1, discussed in Section 4.3 below. As mentioned above,
one purpose of req is to prevent the adversary from mounting trivial attacks, but it also allows us to
capture different settings with no changes to the main game. For example, req encodes whether the
game captures security for extendable-output n-KDFs (XOF-n-KDFs), when req =⇒ reqX , or for
non-extendable-output n-KDFs (NOF-n-KDFs), namely when req =⇒ reqN . The task of the adversary
in the resulting game is to distinguish real outputs of the KDF F from uniformly random strings of the
same length.
    The game begins by sampling a vector zi (of length u) of source key material from each Σi ∈ Σ. It
then runs the adversary with oracle access to the procedures NewKey, SetKey, Ro$-KDF, and KDF.



                                                        10
              fixLℓ-kdf -d
     Game GF,Σ,req           :                          SetKey(i, σ, c)          set new dishonest key for source i

     Initialize()                                       11      / Σi .Skm ∨ c ∈
                                                           If σ ∈                / Σi .Ctx: Return ⊥
                                                        12 ν ←ν+1
     1   For i = 1 to r do:
                                                        13 k[ν].(σ,c,src,t) ← (σ, c, i, dishon)
     2     zi ←$ Σi
              vector of key material from Σi            Ro$-KDF((v1 , . . . , vn ), L, ℓ)
                 ∗
     Finalize(d )                                            evaluate KDF or return random string
     3 If ¬req(k, Qr , Q$ ):                            14 K1 ← F(k[v1 ].(σ,c) , . . . , k[vn ].(σ,c) , L, ℓ)
          check for trivial attacks                     15 K0 ←$ Bℓ B = {0, 1} or O
     4    Return 0                                            freshness condition in req prevents trivial attack
                 ∗                                         from repeated queries
     5 Return d
                                                        16 Q$ .append((v1 , . . . , vn ), L, ℓ)
     NewKey(i, j)        new honest key
                                                        17 Return Kd
     6  If zi [j] = ⊥: Return ⊥
      7 (σ, c, α) ← zi [j] ; zi [j] ← ⊥                 KDF((v1 , . . . , vn ), L, ℓ)
           secrets can only be assigned once                   evaluate KDF
      8 ν ←ν+1           increment key counter          18   K ← F(k[v1 ].(σ,c) , . . . , k[vn ].(σ,c) , L, ℓ)
      9 k[ν].(σ,c,α,src,t) ← (σ, c, α, i, hon)
                                                        19 Qr .append((v1 , . . . , vn ), L, ℓ)
     10 Return α
                                                        20 Return K


Figure 3: Games Gkdf    -d        fixLℓ-kdf -d
                     F,Σ,req and GF,Σ,req      defining kdf security for an n-input key derivation function
F, an (n, r)-source collection Σ, and requirement req; see Table 1 for the requirement definition. The
“fixed-label-and-length” (fixLℓ-kdf) version of the game is for a KDF with fixed label L and output
length ℓ (in gray boxes, which can essentially be ignored).


      Oracle NewKey takes as input two indexes i, j: the first one specifies from which source Σi ∈ Σ
the key material should be taken, and the second one the position j ∈ [u] of the desired key material
in the vector zi . The oracle assigns a new “honest” input for F with source key material, context, and
auxiliary information (σ, c, α) = zi [j], where “honest” indicates that the key material is not influenced by
the adversary. The new key is stored in a vector k[·], together with the index i of its source. The game
keeps track of the next available position in k by using the counter ν. Finally, the used key material is
deleted from zi , preventing it from being assigned again, and the auxiliary information is returned to the
adversary as leakage. Note that the key material can only be assigned once to a position in k, but then
the value may be used multiple times to derive keys.
      Complementing NewKey, oracle SetKey allows the adversary to register (maliciously chosen) input
key material of its choice for a designated source. These keys are also stored in the vector k[·] at the
next available position ν. To distinguish them from honest keys, keys registered using oracle SetKey are
marked with k[ν].t = dishon. This oracle also allows the adversary to void an optional key material input
of the KDF by registering a new key with σ set to the dedicated symbol ⊥. Such void optional inputs
are marked as dishon since they do not contribute to the entropy of the derived key. To avoid tracking
unusable entries in the key vector which are not well-formed, we explicitly demand that the adversary-set
source key material and context are within the corresponding support sets of the indicated source.6
      Finally, in oracles Ro$-KDF and KDF the adversary can request outputs from the n-KDF. The
oracles take as input a vector (v1 , . . . , vn ) of indexes, where vp indicates which source key material and
context from vector k to use in position p. The compliance of these inputs is checked in the requirement
req at the end of the game. (For example, reqValidPos ensures that inputs are only used in positions
associated with the source from which the key material was drawn.) The other arguments passed to the
oracle are the label L and the output key length ℓ. In the Ro$-KDF oracle, the final key is replaced by a
random string of length ℓ iff the game bit d = 0. The game stores query inputs for oracle Ro$-KDF in
the list Q$ and queries to oracle KDF in Qr .
      The game ends when the adversary runs oracle Finalize with its bit guess d ∗ as input. If requirement
req is fulfilled (indicating that, at a minimum, there have been no trivial attacks), Finalize returns
d ∗ ; otherwise, it returns 0. The parameter req additionally allows us further restrict the success of the
  6 Recall that ⊥ ∈ Skm if the KDF supports optional inputs.




                                                         11
  Name            Description        Predicate

  req1HKey        At least one       (∀((v1 , . . . , vn ), L, ℓ) ∈ Q$ )(∃p ∈ [n]) : k[vp ].t = hon
                  honest key
  reqXOF          XOF freshness (∀q ≤ |Q$ |) (∀q ′ ≤ |Q$ ∥Qr |), (vq , Lq , ∗) ← Q$ [q],
                                (vq′ , Lq′ , ∗) ← (Q$ ∥Qr )[q ′ ] : q ̸= q ′ =⇒ (vq , Lq ) ̸= (vq′ , Lq′ )
  reqNOF          NOF freshness (∀q ≤ |Q$ |) (∀q ′ ≤ |Q$ ∥Qr |) : q ̸= q ′ =⇒ Q$ [q] ̸= (Q$ ∥Qr )[q ′ ]
  reqNoDColl      No dishonest       (∀v, v ′ ≤ ν) : v ̸= v ′ ∧ k[v].t = k[v ′ ].t = dishon
                  key collisions     =⇒ k[v].(σ,c,src) ̸= k[v ′ ].(σ,c,src)
  reqValidPos     Keys in         (∀((v1 , . . . , vn ), L, ℓ) ∈ Q$ ∥Qr )(∀p ∈ [n]) : k[vp ].src = Σ-map(p)
                  valid positions
  reqX            XOF KDF            reqXOF ∧ req1HKey ∧ reqNoDColl ∧ reqValidPos
  reqN            NOF KDF            reqNOF ∧ req1HKey ∧ reqNoDColl ∧ reqValidPos

  req1×Key (S)    One-time keys (∀q, q ′ ≤ |Q$ ∥Qr |), ((v1 , . . . , vn ), ∗, ∗) ← (Q$ ∥Qr )[q],
                  for sources S ((v1′ , . . . , vn′ ), ∗, ∗) ← (Q$ ∥Qr )[q ′ ],
                                (∀p ∈ [n] | Σ-map(p) ∈ S) : q ̸= q ′ =⇒ vp ̸= vp′
  reqHybridKR (S) Honest keys        (∀p ∈ [n] | Σ-map(p) ∈ S)(∀((v1 , . . . , vn ), L, ℓ) ∈ Q$ ∥Qr ) :
                  for sources S      k[vp ].t = hon
  reqHybrid (S)   Honest keys        req1×Key (S) ∧ reqHybridKR (S)
                  for sources S
                  (no key reuse)
  reqNoReal       No queries to      |Qr | = 0
                  KDF oracle


Table 1: Requirements req for games Gkdf   -d        fixLℓ-kdf -d
                                        F,Σ,req and GF,Σ,req      (the latter fixes the label and length inputs
in the gray boxes) defined in Figure 3. The upper predicates are necessary to rule out trivial attacks, the
lower predicates are optional and implement various useful refinements.


adversary, thereby obtaining multiple different security notions from one game, as explained next.
   We define the following security notion for n-KDFs, where Gkdf F,Σ,req (A) is as defined in Figure 3.

Definition 6 (KDF security). Let F be an n-KDF. We define the advantage of an adversary A against
the KDF security of F with source collection Σ and requirement req as
                                             kdf -1           kdf -0
                            F,Σ,req (A) = Pr GF,Σ,req (A) − Pr GF,Σ,req (A) .
                       Advkdf
                                                                          

    Note that for this definition to be meaningful, the requirements must include all the trivial attack
restrictions. That is, we demand that req implies either reqN or reqX . We elaborate on the relations
between the security notions induced by the different requirements below.

4.3    Requirements
The parameter req flexibly controls the admissible actions of the adversary, penalizing any violations at
the end of the game. The possible requirements are listed in Table 1.
Fundamental Requirements. The first core requirement is called req1HKey and ensures that there
is at least one “honest” key among the secrets input to the n-KDF in a Ro$-KDF query. Otherwise,
the adversary could call oracle Ro$-KDF on only maliciously chosen keys and easily determine the
secret game bit d. Additionally, in order to prevent trivial attacks, req must also include one of the two
“freshness” requirements reqXOF and reqNOF . These ensure that queries to the challenge oracle Ro$-KDF
are fresh, in the sense that the same inputs have not been used in a prior computation of F. The difference
between the two is whether the output length ℓ is considered to contribute to freshness or not: reqXOF


                                                         12
caters to extendable-output functions (XOF) and hence does not take the output length into account
when checking freshness. In contrast, with reqNOF , two queries are considered fresh with respect to one
another even if they only differ in the desired output length ℓ and should hence produce independent
outputs, even if all other inputs are equal, in order for the n-KDF to be secure.
    The last requirement to prevent trivial attacks is called reqNoDColl . It disallows the adversary from
registering the same input key material (σ, c) more than once per source in oracle SetKey. Without
this check, the adversary could call oracle Ro$-KDF on distinct inputs ((v1 , . . . , vi , . . . , vn ), L, ℓ) and
((v1 , . . . , vi′ , . . . , vn ), L, ℓ), where vi ̸= vi′ both refer to dishonest inputs holding the same key material
(σ, c). That is, the indexes vi , vi′ are distinct, but k[vi ].σ,c = k[vi′ ].σ,c . This would allow the adversary
to bypass the freshness check, making two identical queries that look distinct to the game, and hence
to trivially distinguish real from random answers of the oracle, because in the real case the responses
would be identical, whereas in the random case this rarely happens. For optional inputs, the adversary
must—and can—point to a fixed index vi holding symbol ⊥ to satisfy reqNoDColl .
    Finally, we also use req to ensure that the inputs to the KDF computation are used in the correct
positions. Recall that the game is parameterized by a source collection Σ = (Σ1 , . . . , Σr ) which associates
the r ≤ n sources to the input positions of the KDF via the mapping Σ-map : [n] → [r] associated to Σ.
Requirement reqValidPos ensures that there are no KDF computations in which honest or adversarially set
keys are used in a position not associated to their source. (For most n-KDF constructions, the source
collection either consists of a single source covering all inputs—in which case this check is not needed—or
of n sources associated to one input position each—in which case Σ-map is the identity function.)
    For XOF-n-KDFs and NOF-n-KDFs, we conveniently collect the minimum necessary requirements in
the predicates reqX and reqN , respectively.
Optional Requirements. It is sometimes convenient to make further restrictions beyond what is
strictly necessary. For example, reqNoReal restricts the adversary from making any queries to oracle KDF.
That is, there are no “real” queries—only challenge queries to oracle Ro$-KDF are allowed. We can also
ask that keys in certain positions (corresponding to a set S of sources) are only used once in queries
with requirement req1×Key (S). The latter is useful if one considers information-theoretically secure key
material that should be used only once. Note that the predicate still allows the same key input to appear
at multiple positions within a single query, as well as across queries, in different positions. This captures
that, if the source has multiple valid positions, then the n-KDF must be robust to reusing key material
as long as the position is new. That is, order matters.
The Hybrid Requirement(s). Our fundamental requirements reqX and reqN provide very strong
security guarantees. With these requirements, security refers to indistinguishability of challenge values
from random, as long as one of the key material inputs in each query is honest (requirement req1HKey ).
The positions of the good inputs, however, may vary with each challenge query. For instance, for the
first real-or-random query the key material k[v1 ].(σ,c) may be honest and the material k[v2 ].(σ,c) may be
controlled by the adversary, and for the second real-or-random query it may be the opposite case. This
captures cases where individual outputs of sources may be weak.
    In contrast, the common notion of hybrid key derivation, e.g., combining classical and quantum-
resistant sources, demands that at least one source is good, such that all key material inputs from this
source are honest. This embodies the idea that the underlying assumption (classical or post-quantum)
cannot be broken, implying that all input key material from the source contains sufficiently high entropy.
This is a more restrictive stipulation, summarized in the requirement reqHybridKR (S), for a designated
set S of good sources: it demands that all keys from sources in S are good (i.e., honestly generated),
whereas the remaining sources in [r] \ S should be treated as providing no security.
    To see that the hybrid requirement is restricting the adversary more than the regular one, note that
reqHybridKR (S) =⇒ req1HKey for a non-empty set S because, by surjectivity of Σ-map, a good source i ∈ S
according to predicate reqHybridKR (S) must be assigned to one or more positions p1 , p2 , . . . . But then the
honest key material inputs of this source i must appear in these positions in all real-or-random queries,
such that each query contains at least one honest key material input, implying predicate req1HKey . The
converse does not hold in general, as the above example with two queries switching the position of the
honest contribution shows.
    However, even when imposing the stricter requirement reqHybridKR (S), our model still captures stronger
guarantees than commonly expected in hybrid scenarios. Namely, reqHybridKR (S) allows for key reuse
from good sources in S (hence the “KR”), in arbitrary combinations with other keys (even from sources
deemed insecure). However, hybrid combiners are usually used with ephemeral/one-time-use key material,
where the good key is combined only once with possibly insecure keys. The reason for this becomes clear


                                                         13
in our model: Assume that there is a source in the source collection not in S, and that the adversary can
predict the source key material corresponding to NewKey oracle query v for this source. That is, the
adversary knows σ such that σ = k[v].σ . (For example, the source could be Diffie-Hellman key exchange
and the adversary has a quantum computer.) This allows the adversary to register a dishonest key in
oracle SetKey with the same source key material σ and context as the honest, predicted key. Now, if
the adversary makes two queries to oracle Ro$-KDF which reuse an honest key from a good, secure
source, together with first the honest predicted key and next the dishonest key with the same value, then
it can trivially distinguish real outputs from random, without having broken the good source. Thus,
to capture the usual hybrid guarantee that the construction is secure as long as at least one source is
secure (rather than all sources), we additionally require the predicate req1×Key (S). That is, that key
material from the “good” sources in S are only used at most once in each position. Hence, we ultimately
capture this common hybrid approach with the requirement reqHybrid (S) which combines reqHybridKR (S)
and req1×Key (S).
    The difference between the two scenarios, our strong main notions and the hybrid setting, becomes
discernible when showing security of constructions. The fundamental requirements reqX and reqN are
less restrictive for the adversary. Since the adversary in each real-or-random query may vary the position
of the genuine key material input, security proofs require all sources to be secure. This typically results
in security statements where the advantage against the multi-input KDF is bounded by the sum of the
security advantages against the sources. For instance, assuming that the KDF behaves like a random
oracle and assuming a suitable input encoding, we obtain (Theorem 8 in Section 5.1):
                                                                   r
                                                                   X
                                   RO-KDFn [HT ],Σ,req (A) ≤ 2 ·
                                Advkdf                                   Advup
                                                                            Σi (Bi ),
                                                                   i=1

with respect to the unpredictability of all sources.7 For the hybrid setting, with the more demanding
restriction for the adversary, one usually requires only security of one source such that the bounds become
tighter. Once more, for the random-oracle-based KDF we obtain (Theorem 9 in Section 5.1):
                                                                                up
                             RO-KDFn [HT ],Σ,req∧reqHybrid (S) (A) ≤ 2 · min AdvΣi (Bi ) .
                        Advkdf
                                                                                        
                                                                         i∈S

and the advantage against the random-oracle-based KDF is thus bounded by the minimum over the
unpredictability advantages of all good sources. This indeed captures the expected intuition behind
hybrid multi-input key derivation: derived keys should inherit the strength of the unbroken key material
source(s) entering the KDF, as long as good keys are used only once.

4.4    Model Simplification and Relations
Our KDF security notion provides the adversary with both a challenge oracle (Ro$-KDF) and a “real”
function oracle (KDF). This is in contrast to, for example, PRF security, where the game only has a
real-or-random challenge oracle. Here, we show that providing the real oracle in addition to the challenge
oracle does not make a qualitative difference to the KDF security notion: one can use the Ro$-KDF
to first replace all Ro$-KDF and KDF query responses with random, then again to change the KDF
queries back to real (the formal proof is in Appendix C). That is, KDF security with both real and
real-or-random oracle is equivalent to KDF security with only the real-or-random oracle.
Proposition 7. Let F be an n-KDF and let adversary A be an adversary against the KDF security of
F. Then for any source collection Σ of size r, for freshness condition reqF ∈ {reqN , reqX } and optional
req ∈ {req1×Key (S), reqHybridKR (S), reqHybrid (S), true} with S ⊆ [r], there exists an adversary B such that

                               F,Σ,reqF ∧req (A) ≤ 2 · AdvF,Σ,reqF ∧req∧reqNoReal (B) .
                            Advkdf                        kdf


Adversary B has query count qOr (B) = qOr (A) for any oracle Or from the set {NewKey, SetKey},
and qRo$-KDF (B) ≤ qRo$-KDF (A) + qKDF (A). The running time of B is roughly the same as that of A.
   In Appendix B, we further relate the security of XOF- and NOF-n-KDFs, and also formally justify
the approach taken by, for example, TLS 1.3 [56] to bind the input key material to its intended output
length by including the latter in the label, effectively transforming a XOF-KDF to a NOF-KDF.
   7 The factor 2 accounts for adversarial evaluation queries made to KDF in addition to the ones made to Ro$-KDF; we

give a generic reduction resulting in this factor in the next section.


                                                         14
                       RO-KDFn [HT ]((σ1 , c1 ), (σ2 , c2 ), . . . , (σn , cn ), L, ℓ)
                        1 K ← HT (⟨σ1 , c1 , σ2 , c2 , . . . , σn , cn , L⟩)
                            parameter ℓ only for T = XOF
                        2 Return K[1..ℓ]


      Figure 4: KDF RO-KDFn [HT ] based on random oracle H with some recoverable encoding ⟨·⟩.


5     Analyzing Real-World Constructions
We now apply our security model to analyze real-world constructions of multi-input KDFs. To illustrate
the versatility of our model, we study three constructions with distinct internal designs, input key material
settings, and output behaviors: the approach in MLS [6] to combine pre-shared keys for injection into its
key schedule, an ETSI proposal based on concatenation [35], and the key derivation in Signal’s X3DH
handshake protocol [49]. Before diving into these concrete constructions, we begin by discussing a generic
hash-based construction.

5.1    Random-Oracle-Based Construction
In this section, we show that one can use a hash function, modeled as a unitary random oracle, to
construct a secure multi-input KDF by applying any reasonable encoding of the inputs and then hashing
them. This results in a secure output key as long as one of the inputs is unpredictable. If one uses a
hash function H with fixed output length, e.g., one of the members of the SHA-3 family, then one obtains
a fixed-output-length NOF-n-KDF; if the hash function has extendable output length, e.g., one of the
SHAKE versions, then one obtains a XOF-n-KDF. Formally, we thus distinguish between random oracles
with non-extendable (fixed) output length hl, denoted as HNOF , and those with extendable outputs,
denoted HXOF . The latter takes an additional length parameter ℓ as input and outputs a string of length
ℓ. A formal definition of such random oracles appears in Appendix A.2. In the NOF-n-KDF case, we
assume that the n-KDF has a fixed output length ℓ, which is upper-bounded by hl, and truncate the
output of H to ℓ bits.
    We assume some recoverable encoding ⟨σ1 , c1 , σ2 , c2 , . . . , σn , cn , L⟩ of the input data. One option to
encode the values σi , ci , and L is to prepend each value with its length, encoded in a fixed-space entry.
For instance, if the length of each entry is less than 232 bits, then four octets suffice. We would then set

                    ⟨σ1 , c1 , σ2 , c2 , . . . , σn , cn , L⟩ = [|σ1 |]32 ∥σ1 ∥ [|c1 |]32 ∥c1 ∥ . . . ∥ [|L|]32 ∥L

where [i]32 denotes the encoding of integer i < 232 with 32 bits. Then, one can parse the string from left
to right and recover the entries again.
    The following theorem shows that this generic hash-based construction, displayed in Figure 4, is a
secure n-KDF based on the unpredictability of the source collection:
Theorem 8 (Maximum exposure KDF security of RO-KDFn ). Let HT be a random oracle (with output
length hl in case of T = NOF resp. unbounded output length in case of T = XOF). Consider RO-KDFn [HT ]
as in Figure 4 (with output length KLout = {ℓ} in case of T = NOF resp. output length KLout = [hl]
in case of T = XOF). Let req be reqN for T = NOF and be reqX for T = XOF. Then for any source
collection Σ = (Σ1 , . . . , Σr ) with mapping Σ-map, each source outputting at most u elements, and any
adversary A against the kdf security of RO-KDFn [HT ], making at most qNewKey (A), qSetKey (A) and
qRO (A) queries to oracles NewKey, and SetKey and to the random oracle HT , we have
                                                                               r
                                                                               X
                                     RO-KDFn [HT ],Σ,req (A) ≤ 2 ·
                                  Advkdf                                             Advup
                                                                                        Σi (Bi ),
                                                                               i=1

for adversaries Bi with roughly the same running time as A, and making at most qPredict (Bi ) =
qNewKey (A) · qSetKey (A) + n · u · qRO (A) queries to their prediction oracle.
   The above bound requires that all sources in the collection are unpredictable. This is because our
security model with req ∈ {reqN , reqX } captures the strong “maximum exposure” setting, and accordingly
gives strong guarantees. In particular, it ensures that even highly correlated inputs to the Ro$-KDF
result in quasi-independent random answers. If the key material σj for some key with index v for only
one source at some position p was predictable, then the adversary could register a dishonest key under a


                                                                  15
fresh index v ′ with σ ′ = σj and identical context information, and repeat the query to the Ro$-KDF
with v ′ replacing v. If the oracle returns real KDF outputs, then the answers would be identical; if the
oracle returns fresh random values, then the answers would be different with overwhelming probability.
This would allow the adversary to distinguish the two cases. Below, in Theorem 9, we show that a lower
advantage bound is possible in the weaker setting of hybrid security.
Proof of Theorem 8. We assume that A does not make queries to oracle KDF. By Proposition 7, such
queries can be simulated via Ro$-KDF oracle queries, increasing the advantage by a factor 2. It remains
to argue that any queries to oracle Ro$-KDF result in random-looking answers even for the “real” game
(d = 1) unless A makes a random oracle query HT to the actual input of the KDF evaluation. We will
argue that this contradicts unpredictability of the source collection, considering a family of adversaries
B1 , . . . , Br simultaneously. The adversary Bi against unpredictability receives a vector zi .α of auxiliary
material for the sample from source Σi . Its goal is to predict some key material value zi [j].σ by running a
black-box simulation of A, simulating the random oracle as well as oracles of the “random” KDF security
game (with secret bit d = 0) by sampling the vectors for the other sources. To do this, adversary Bi
acts as the challenger in the random KDF game, with one exception: If adversary A makes a query to
oracle NewKey for source i, then adversary Bi tracks the counter ν in k[ν].σ , rather than the (unknown)
source key material.
     Let G0 be equivalent to Gkdf    -0                                  kdf -1
                                   RO-KDFn [HT ],Σ,req and let G1 be to GRO-KDFn [HT ],Σ,req . We note that the
view of adversary A of the simulated game G0 is identical to G1 unless one out of two things happen:
  A. Adversary A makes two distinct queries ((v1 , . . . , vn ), L, ℓ), ((v1′ , . . . , vn′ ), L′ , ℓ′ ) to oracle Ro$-KDF,
     such that the input ⟨σ1 , c1 , σ2 , c2 , . . . , σn , cn , L, ℓ⟩ to the hash function underlying KDF resulting
     from these oracle input values collide. In this case, the outputs in the random KDF game will be
     distinct with high probability, whereas they should be equal in the real KDF game.
  B. Adversary A makes a query ((v1 , . . . , vn ), L, ℓ) to oracle Ro$-KDF, corresponding to the encoded
     input ⟨σ1 , c1 , σ2 , c2 , . . . , σn , cn , L, ℓ⟩ to the hash function underlying the KDF, and A also makes the
     query ⟨σ1 , c1 , σ2 , c2 , . . . , σn , cn , L, ℓ⟩ directly to the random oracle. In this case, the answers from
     the two oracles will again be distinct with high probability in case d = 0, whereas they should be
     identical in case d = 1.
    We argue that in each of these two cases, there exists a source Σi and corresponding adversary Bi
such that Bi can break the unpredictability of Σi .
    Starting with case A, observe first that requirement reqNOF resp. reqXOF implies that the adversary
A can never repeat queries for the same values (v1 , . . . , vn , L) with different lengths. For T = NOF this
follows immediately from reqNOF and the single admissible length input ℓ, in the case of T = XOF the
freshness condition reqXOF disallows queries with identical (v1 , . . . , vn , L) but different length values ℓ =         ̸ ℓ′ .
Hence, since encoding is recoverable, we must always have different input source key material or label
values for the oracle.
    Thus, consider the (distinct) queries ((v1 , . . . , vn ), L), ((v1′ , . . . , vn′ ), L′ ). There are three cases in which
repeated inputs to the underlying KDF can occur:
 A1. Assume that there exists a position index p such that vp ̸= vp′ but such that the keys are honest,
     k[vp ].t = k[vp′ ].t = hon, but contain the same secret, k[vp ].σ = k[vp′ ].σ . The requirement reqValidPos
     ensures that both keys at position p must originate from the same source i = Σ-map(p). But then
     this gives a straightforward reduction to unpredictability for algorithm Bi , because Bi immediately
     wins the unpredictability game if such σ-collisions occur within a source.

 A2. Assume that there exists an index p such that vp ̸= vp′ and one key is honest, k[vp ].t = hon, and
     one is dishonest, k[vp′ ].t = dishon, but they contain the same secret, k[vp ].σ = k[vp′ ].σ . Then we
     can construct an algorithm Bi against the unpredictability of source i = Σ-map(p), by letting it
     immediately call its prediction oracle on the index in the source sample corresponding to the honest
     key, and the key material σ ∗ = k[vp′ ].σ of the dishonest key.
       More specifically, note that any adversary Bi can keep track of all key materials of dishonest keys
       by observing A’s call to oracle SetKey, and knows all sources and positions of (unknown) honest
       key material by observing the NewKey queries of A. When A sets a new honest key for source
       i and index j, then Bi will call oracle Predict on position j and all dishonest key materials σ ∗
       set for source i before, resulting in at most qSetKey (A) calls. When A sets a new dishonest key to
       value σ ∗ for source i, then Bi will look up all the previously set honest keys for source i and their


                                                              16
      position j in the source sample and call oracle Predict on (j, σ ∗ ), resulting in at most qNewKey (A)
      calls for each of the qSetKey (A) calls to SetKey. In either case, if an index p as above in a call to
      oracle Ro$-KDF occurs, then Bi successfully predicts the secret key material of the corresponding
      source i = Σ-map(p).
 A3. Assume that there exists an index p such that vp ̸= vp′ , both keys are dishonest, k[vp ].t = k[vp′ ].t =
     dishon, but where the key material and context information are identical k[vp ].(σ,c) = k[vp′ ].(σ,c) .
     Note that such queries for the same position p are disallowed according to requirement reqNoDColl .
We can thus conclude that for case A, either one of our algorithms Bi breaks unpredictability for the
source i = Σ-map(p), or A loses because of requirement reqNoDColl .
     Now we turn to case B, where the adversary may notice a difference between games G0 and G1 by
querying the random oracle on the input corresponding to a challenge query. Note that requirement
req1HKey guarantees that at least one honest key must be used in each query to Ro$-KDF. Hence, a
successfully distinguishing random oracle query by A must predict such a secret value.
     Once more, we can construct adversaries Bi against unpredictability. For each query ⟨σ1 , c1 , σ2 , c2 , . . . ,
σn , cn , L, ℓ⟩ of A to its random oracle, for each p such that i = Σ-map(p) (at most n), query oracle Predict
on all values j ∈ [u] and σp . If A ever makes a random oracle query ⟨σ1 , c1 , σ2 , c2 , . . . , σn , cn , L, ℓ⟩ and a
corresponding Ro$-KDF query ((v1 , . . . , vn ), L, ℓ) such that k[vp ].t = hon for i = Σ-map(p), then Bi wins
the unpredictability game for the source i = Σ-map(p).
     Let bad be the event that one of case A or B defined above occurs. Then we have established that G0
and G1 are identical-until-bad, so by the fundamental lemma of game playing [10] we obtain:

              RO-KDFn [HT ],Σ,req (A) = Pr [ G0 (A) ] − Pr [ G1 (A) ] ≤ Pr [ bad occurs in G0 (A) ] .
           Advkdf                                                                                                  (1)

Now let badi for i ∈ [r] be the event that bad occurs for a collision (in the sense of case A between two
Ro$-KDF queries, respectively between a Ro$-KDF and a random oracle query in the case of B at some
position p corresponding to some source i = Σ-map(p)). Then, by the union bound
                                                         r
                                                         X
                         Pr [ bad occurs in G0 (A) ] ≤         Pr [ badi occurs in G0 (A) ] ,                      (2)
                                                         i=1

and we have argued above that

                                   Pr [ badi occurs in G0 (A) ] ≤ Advup
                                                                     Σi (Bi ) .                                    (3)

    Combining Equations (1)–(3) yields the theorem bound.
   The following theorem shows that RO-KDFn [HT ] is a secure hybrid n-KDF. That is, that it is
secure as long as at least one of the sources of key material is unpredictable. For this, we use the
requirement reqHybrid , combining reqHybridKR and req1×Key (cf. Table 1).
Theorem 9 (Hybrid KDF security of RO-KDFn ). Let HT be a hash function, which we model as a
random oracle (with output length hl in case of T = NOF resp. unbounded output length in case of
T = XOF, see Figure 15). Consider RO-KDFn [HT ] as in Figure 4 (with output length KLout = {ℓ} in
case of T = NOF resp. output length KLout ∈ [hl] in case of T = XOF). Let req be reqN for T = NOF
and be reqX for T = XOF. Then for any source collection Σ = (Σ1 , . . . , Σr ) with mapping Σ-map, and
any non-empty set S ⊆ [r] there exist adversaries Bi for i ∈ S such that
                                                                              up
                     AdvkdfRO-KDFn [HT ],Σ,req∧reqHybrid (S) (A) ≤ 2 · min AdvΣi (Bi ) .
                                                                                      
                                                                        i∈S

Adversaries Bi have roughly the same running time as A, and make at most qPredict (Bi ) = n · u · qRO (A)
queries to their prediction oracles.
Proof. As in the proof of Theorem 8, we may again leverage Proposition 7 and assume that adversary A
never queries oracle KDF, causing a factor 2 in the security bound. Let i ∈ S be an index of a good
source. We construct an adversary Bi against the unpredictability of source Σi . Adversary Bi receives
a sample z.α but does not have access to the secret key material z.σ . Let p1 , p2 , . . . , pk ∈ [n] be the
positions in the KDF that Σ-map maps to source i; by assumption about the surjectivity of Σ-map at
least one such position must exist. Then Bi does not know any of the key material inputs for these
positions when simulating the oracles for A. However, Bi samples all the data for the other sources in the


                                                          17
simulation, including the ones in S \ {i}. It can therefore map all indexes at other positions p (different
from p1 , p2 , . . . , pk ) for queries ((v1 , . . . , vn ), L, ℓ) of A to the simulated Ro$-KDF oracle to the actual
values k[vp ].(σ,c) ; for all positions p1 , p2 , . . . , pk adversary Bi simply leaves the value vpj . We call this the
partial key-mapping of ((v1 , . . . , vn ), L, ℓ).
    Adversary Bi now responds to A’s oracle queries to Ro$-KDF by simply returning a random key.
All queries to SetKey and NewKey are handled locally by Bi , keeping track of key values. The
auxiliary information about keys from source i are given as input to Bi in the unpredictability game,
and for keys from other sources Bi knows them from the internal sampling step, such that Bi can
return this information to A for NewKey queries. In addition, for each query of A to its random
oracle H about ⟨σ1 , c1 , σ2 , c2 , . . . , σn , cn , L⟩—we assume that A never repeats such a query for the same
data—adversary Bi answers with a fresh random value. When A eventually stops, adversary Bi calls its
oracle Predict on all values j ∈ [u] and all inputs σpj for j = 1, 2, . . . , k that have occurred in a query
⟨σ1 , c1 , σ2 , c2 , . . . , σn , cn , L⟩ to H. Overall these are at most n · u queries for each of the qRO (A) random
oracle queries of A. Then Bi also stops.
    The simulation is perfect, unless
   1. A makes a random oracle query about some actual input ⟨σ1 , c1 , σ2 , c2 , . . . , σn , cn , L⟩ used in the
      Ro$-KDF oracle, possibly noting that the random oracle answer does not match, or
   2. A manages to make distinct queries ((v1 , . . . , vn ), L, ℓ) and ((v1′ , . . . , vn′ ), L′ , ℓ′ ) to oracle Ro$-KDF
      that map to the same value under the partial key-mapping.
    For the former case note that this eventually results in a successful prediction attack, such that we
can bound the probability of this happening by Advup        Σi (Bi ). The reason is that req HybridKR (S)—which is
part of reqHybrid (S)—stipulates that all key inputs in oracle Ro$-KDF at positions p1 , p2 , . . . , pk need
to come from the good source i ∈ S. Hence, if A ever makes such a random oracle query, Bi eventually
makes the corresponding call to oracle Predict and wins the unpredictability game.
    For the other case, that A makes colliding queries to oracle Ro$-KDF, we argue that this would
violate requirement req1×Key (S)—which is part of reqHybrid (S). Recall that this requirement stipulates
that each key index vpj at the positions p1 , p2 , . . . , pk corresponding to source Σi can only occur once
among all queries to oracle Ro$-KDF. Therefore, the partial key mapping, keeping the values vpi as is,
can never map to the same input twice. If, on the other hand, two distinct indexes vpj ̸= vp′ j would result
in the same secret key material for source Σi , then this meant a collision in the key material and is also
covered by the unpredictability term Advup   Σi (Bi ).
    Overall, the simulation of each adversary Bi is close to an actual attack of A, with the difference
in probabilities bounded from above by Advup      Σi (Bi ). But in the simulation the secret bit d of oracle
Ro$-KDF is not used at all and thus completely hidden, such that A cannot obtain an advantage over the
guessing probability. Since this holds for all adversaries Bi , we get the minimum over all unpredictability
advantages as an upper bound.

5.2     MLS: n-KDF Combining Pre-Shared Keys
The MLS [6, Section 8.4] protocol uses the n-KDF given in Figure 5 to combine n pre-shared keys of
length 256 bits each into a single key using HKDF (i.e., based on HMAC). The combiner, which we
denote MLS-PSK-KDF, takes as input the n pre-shared keys psk i , each associated with some identifying
information called PSKLabel in [6] which we treat as context ci . It does not take any label as input (i.e.,
L = ε), and the output length ℓ is fixed to hl, the output length of the hash function underlying HKDF.
The KDF first derives a psk_inputi value from each psk i input, binding the key and context together.
Then, in a cascading application of HKDF.Extract (i.e., HMAC), it combines the n psk_inputi values into
a final value psk_secretn , which is also the final output key K.
    Assuming that the pre-shared keys are generated by a pseudorandom source, we show that MLS-PSK-KDF
is a secure (NOF) KDF based on the dual-PRF security of HKDF.Extract (i.e., regular and swap-PRF
security of HMAC), PRF security of HKDF.Expand (i.e., of HMAC, as the output length is fixed to hl), and
the collision resistance of HMAC. Note that HMAC achieves dual-PRF security and collision resistance
for the fixed key-input lengths used in MLS-PSK-KDF, as shown in [3].
Theorem 10 (KDF security of MLS-PSK-KDF). Let MLS-PSK-KDF be the NOF-n-KDF in Figure 5.
Let Σ be a pseudorandom source and Σ be the (n, 1)-collection based on Σ. Then for any adversary A




                                                           18
   MLS-PSK-KDF((psk 1 , c1 ), . . . , (psk n , cn ), L = ε, ℓ = hl)
    1 For i = 1..n:
    2   psk_extracted i ← HKDF.Extract(0, psk i )
    3   psk_inputi ← HKDF.Expand(psk_extracted i , ℓ||"MLS 1.0 derived psk"||ci , hl)
    4 psk_secret0 ← 0
    5 For i = 1..n:
    6   psk_secreti ← HKDF.Extract(psk_inputi , psk_secreti−1 )
    7 K ← psk_secretn
    8 Return K


                 Figure 5: MLS n-KDF combiner for pre-shared keys psk i , based on HMAC.


against the KDF security of MLS-PSK-KDF there exist adversaries B1 , . . . , B6 such that
                                                 
               Advkdf
                    MLS-PSK-KDF,Σ,reqN (A) ≤ 2 ·   Advpr           swap-prf
                                                      Σ (B1 ) + AdvHKDF.Extract (B2 )

                           + Advprf                                    prf
                                HKDF.Expand (B3 ) + AdvHMAC (B4 ) + AdvHKDF.Extract (B5 )
                                                       cr

                                                                      n · (qRo$-KDF (A) + qKDF (A)) 
                           + (n − 1) · Advswap-prf
                                          HKDF.Extract (B6 ) +                                        .
                                                                                   28hl
The adversaries B1 , . . . , B6 have running time roughly the same as A and the following query counts:
qNew (B2 ) = qFn (B2 ) = qNewKey (A); qNew (B3 ) = qNewKey (A) and qFn (B3 ) ≤ n·(qRo$-KDF (A)+qKDF (A));
qNew (B5 ), qFn (B5 ) ≤ n · (qRo$-KDF (A) + qKDF (A)); qNew (B6 ), qFn (B6 ) ≤ qRo$-KDF (A) + qKDF (A).
Proof. We first apply Proposition 7, losing a factor of 2, to move to the KDF security game without real
KDF oracle queries for some adversary A′ with qOr (A′ ) = qOr (A) for Or ∈ {NewKey, SetKey} and
qRo$-KDF (A′ ) = qRo$-KDF (A) + qKDF (A). We then bound the advantage of A′ through a series of game
hops, beginning with the “real” (d = 1) game G0 := Gkdf       -1
                                                            MLS-PSK-KDF,Σ,reqN ∧reqNoReal and ending with the
“random” (d = 0) game.
   We begin by replacing in game G0 the source key material in the vector z1 with uniformly random
values, a step we straightforwardly bound by the pseudorandomness of source Σ:

                                            Pr [ G0 ] − Pr [ G1 ] ≤ Advpr
                                                                       Σ (B1 ).

    In the second hop, game G2 , we replace the psk_extracted i values computed from honest source
keys psk i by uniformly random values. To bound this hop, consider the following reduction B2 to the
multi-user swap-PRF security of HKDF.Extract. Upon each NewKey call of A′ , B2 registers a new key
in the multi-user swap-PRF game, taking the place of psk i . It calls Fn on input 0 for each of these keys
and substitutes the results for the psk_extracted i values. The rest of the game is simulated truthfully, in
particular, B2 handles all dishonest secrets registered via SetKey itself. We have

                                      Pr [ G1 ] − Pr [ G2 ] ≤ Advswap-prf
                                                                 HKDF.Extract (B2 ).

    For game G3 , we next replace HKDF.Expand with a random function where it is used in line 3 of
Figure 5 to compute values psk_inputi from “honest” psk_extracted i (i.e., those derived from honest psk i
and replaced by random in G2 ). Note that this in particular leads to the computed “honest” psk_inputi
values being independently and randomly sampled, except when some psk i key is reused. We bound this
by a reduction B3 to the multi-user (regular) PRF security of HKDF.Expand. Upon each NewKey call
of A′ , B3 register a new psk_extracted i key in the multi-user regular PRF game. It calls Fn on input
ℓ||"MLS 1.0 derived psk"||ci ||0x01 whenever a Ro$-KDF call involves psk_extracted i ; this amounts
to at most n calls to Fn per Ro$-KDF call of A′ (which translates to n calls per KDF or Ro$-KDF
call of A). Again B3 handles dishonest secrets from the SetKey oracle itself. We have

                                      Pr [ G2 ] − Pr [ G3 ] ≤ Advprf
                                                                 HKDF.Expand (B3 ).

    In game G4 , we abort the game (by immediately returning 0), if A′ creates a collision in any psk_inputi
value for some position i computed from dishonest psk i values (registered via the SetKey). That is, we


                                                               19
abort if within or across any Ro$-KDF query/queries, there are two sets of inputs (psk i , ci ) ̸= (psk ′i , ci′ )
such that

                   HKDF.Expand(HKDF.Extract(0, psk i ), ℓ||"MLS 1.0 derived psk"||ci )
                 = HKDF.Expand(HKDF.Extract(0, psk ′i ), ℓ||"MLS 1.0 derived psk"||ci′ ).

Rewriting HKDF in terms of its HMAC building blocks, this means

                           HMAC(HMAC(0, psk i ), ℓ||"MLS 1.0 derived psk"||ci ||0x01)
                     = HMAC(HMAC(0, psk ′i ), ℓ||"MLS 1.0 derived psk"||ci′ ||0x01).

We bound this step by a reduction B4 to the collision resistance of HMAC, noting that in the reduction,
B4 performs the relevant computations itself and can hence detect such collisions. We have

                                                                 HMAC (B4 ).
                                      Pr [ G3 ] − Pr [ G4 ] ≤ Advcr

   Next, in game G5 , within each Ro$-KDF query, we replace HKDF.Extract with a random function
where it is used in line 6 of Figure 5 to compute values psk_secreti from “honest” psk_inputi (i.e., those
derived from honest psk i and replaced by outputs of a random function in G3 ). Similar to before, a
reduction B5 to the PRF security of HKDF.Extract registers a new key for each of these honestly-derived
psk_inputi values (which are independent and random per G3 , except for repeated psk i key material);
there are at most n keys per Ro$-KDF call of A′ (if in each call all keys are honest and previously
unused). It then calls its Fn oracle on psk_secreti−1 to obtain psk_secreti , computing the steps involving
dishonest keys itself; this again amounts to at most n calls to Fn per Ro$-KDF call of A′ . We have

                                   Pr [ G4 ] − Pr [ G5 ] ≤ Advprf
                                                              HKDF.Extract (B5 ).

    Finally, in game G6 , we replace the final output key K = psk_secretn by a uniformly random value in
any Ro$-KDF query. We let a reduction B6 against the swap-PRF security of HKDF.Extract “complete”
the HKDF.Extract derivation chain from the last psk_inputi being derived from an honest psk i (and hence
an output of a random function by game G5 ). Iterating over i = 1 to n − 1, B6 given i registers a new
key in place of each such psk_inputi (at most one per Ro$-KDF call of A′ ) and computes psk_inputi+1
using its Fn (again at most once per Ro$-KDF call of A′ ).
   What remains to be argued is that in completing the chain, there is no collision in the derivation
chain affecting the independence of the final psk_secretn value. Denoting this collision event as coll, and
summing the reductions over i ∈ [1, n − 1], we have

                        Pr [ G5 ] − Pr [ G6 ] ≤ (n − 1) · Advswap-prf
                                                             HKDF.Extract (B6 ) + Pr[coll].

We complete this step by bounding the remaining collision probability.
    Recall that by definition, the inputs ((v1 , . . . , vn ), L, ℓ) between any two Ro$-KDF must differ
somewhere. Given that both the label L = ε and the length ℓ = hl are fixed in the MLS n-KDF combiner,
we can ignore them here. Hence, between any two queries, the key indexes (vi ) must differ for some
position pos. If both of them are honest, then by G3 the resulting psk_inputi values are derived from
independent random keys, making them independent, too. If both of them are dishonest, then by the
reqNoDColl requirement either the key material σ or the context c values must be distinct. So we have by
G4 that the resulting psk_inputi values do not collide and hence distinct PRF inputs are used in this
step (in the application of the swap-PRF game). Finally, the probability of a dishonest psk_inputi value
colliding with an honestly derived one in that position, replaced with random in G3 , is 28hl
                                                                                           1
                                                                                              . Hence, across
all n positions across the qRo$-KDF (A ) = qRo$-KDF (A) + qKDF (A) oracle queries, we can upper bound
                                       ′

such collisions by
                                      n · (qRo$-KDF (A) + qKDF (A))
                                                                         .
                                                    28hl
    Observing that G equals the “random” game Gkdf -0
                       6                                                           completes the proof.
                                                          MLS-PSK-KDF,Σ,reqN ∧reqNoReal


5.3    ETSI-CatKDF: Concatenation Combiner for Generic Sources
In 2020, ETSI published a technical specification describing their take on building hybrid key exchange
systems: TS 103 744 version 1.1.1 [35]. The specification assumes that several key exchange protocols are
executed, each deriving a shared secret ki . Parties may also hold a pre-shared secret psk which—if not


                                                        20
        ETSI-CatKDF((k1 , (c1 , MA1 , MB 1 )), . . . , (kn , (cn , MAn , MB n )), (psk, ε), L, ℓ)
         1 secret ← psk||k1 || . . . ||kn
         2 c ← ⟨c1 , . . . , cn ⟩, MA = ⟨MA1 , . . . , MAn ⟩, MB = ⟨MB 1 , . . . , MB n ⟩
         3 fcontext ← f (c, MA, MB)
         4 K ← HKDF(secret, L, fcontext , ℓ)           label L used as salt input in HKDF
         5 Return K


                                      Figure 6: ETSI-CatKDF based on HKDF.


present—is replaced by an empty string. The keys are combined via an n-KDF that we call ETSI-CatKDF
by concatenating all secret key material. Notably, the standard only considers single-round KEM-based key
exchange protocols to derive key ki , resulting in messages MAi and MB i per key, which we treat as context.
The ETSI proposal employs a context formatting function f which hashes its length-encoded inputs.
    While ETSI proposes ETSI-CatKDF specifically for single time use as part of a hybrid key exchange,
the interface of the KDF suggests that a much broader usage is possible. In fact, for example, the German
Federal Office for Information Security points readers of its technical specification to ETSI-CatKDF for
the general purpose use case of hybridisation [38]. For this reason, we analyze ETSI-CatKDF is the more
general context of a generic n-KDF.
    The concatenation construction ETSI-CatKDF is displayed in Figure 6. It concatenates the source
key materials to get secret, then encodes the context information via function f to derive fcontext , and
finally applies HKDF to key secret, salt input L, context fcontext , and length parameter ℓ. To match our
formalization of an n-KDF we assume that we have a (n, 1)-source collection consisting of a pseudorandom
source Σ generating the key material σi = ki , context information (ci , MAi , MB i ), and some auxiliary
information αi for each position i ∈ [n]. If the optional pre-shared key psk is available, then we assume
that this is output by another source Σ′ as σn+1 = psk, with empty context cn+1 = ε ∈ Ctx = {ε} and
some auxiliary information αn+1 .
    Our first observation is that the construction ETSI-CatKDF is insecure according to our security model
when interpreting it as a generic n-KDF. The reason is that any queries to oracle Ro$-KDF that differ
only in the labels L (for labels strictly shorter than the blocklength B of the hash function underlying
HMAC) and L′ = L∥0x00 yield the same output, allowing an adversary to immediately win. Recall that
the initial extraction step of HKDF pads the labels with sufficiently many zero-bytes up to blocklength,
such that the padded L and L′ in the queries become identical. A similar effect occurs if one label is
longer than B octets and gets hashed first: Then L := H(L′ ) of length B and L′ of more than B octets
would yield the same processed salt input and thus identical answers of Ro$-KDF for different inputs.
    Since these attacks depend on the possible choices of the value L, whether or not they translate
into practical vulnerabilities depends on how ETSI-CatKDF is used in real implementations. Yet, from
our viewpoint, these attacks reveal a misconception in the deployment of the HMAC salt values in
ETSI-CatKDF, rendering the construction’s security brittle. Another issue, which we do not further
explore here, is that keys in secret are simply concatenated, without length encoding. Then keys k1 , k2
and k1′ = k1 ∥k2 , k2′ = ε would yield the same value secret, also leading to potential distinguishing attacks.
    We do not formalize the attacks above but instead turn to a restricted security statement for fixed-size
labels and keys. Notably, the recently published version 1.2.1 of ETSI’s TS 103 744 [36] mandates
labels to have fixed length; the key material arising in the targeted hybrid key exchange setting are also
fixed-length in nature. We also restrict ourselves here to the case of an empty pre-shared secret psk,
confining the KDF inputs to the n keys from the KEM-based key exchange source.
Theorem 11 (KDF security of ETSI-CatKDF). Consider ETSI-CatKDF with empty pre-shared key
(psk = ε, cn+1 = ε) and fixed-length labels L ∈ Ohl , and model HMAC with octet output size hl as a
random oracle. Let Σ be a pseudorandom source with sample size u and Skm = Om and let Σ be the
(n, 1)-collection based on Σ with Σ-map(i) = 1 for all i ∈ [n]. For any adversary A against the kdf
security of ETSI-CatKDF, making at most qRO (A) to the random oracle modeling HMAC, there exists an
adversary B such that
                                               
                                                   pr
                   ETSI-CatKDF,Σ,reqX (A) ≤ 2 · AdvΣ (B) + u · 2
                                                                 −8m
              Advkdf                                        2


                                                        + qRO (A) · qRo$-KDF+KDF (A) · (2−8m + 2−8hl )
                                                                                     
                                                        + (qRo$-KDF+KDF (A))2 · 2−8hl .


                                                               21
where qRo$-KDF+KDF (A) = qRo$-KDF (A) + qKDF (A). Adversary B has roughly the same running time
as A.
    The proof can be easily adapted to the case that either all labels are strictly shorter than hl, or that
all labels are strictly larger than hl, following an argument analogously to [3] for dual-PRFs.
Proof. We may first assume that A does not make any queries to oracle KDF. This can always be
ensured and increases the advantage of A by at most a factor of 2 according to Proposition 7. It also
moves the queries to oracle KDF to queries to Ro$-KDF. We next bound the advantage of A through
a series of game hops, beginning with the “real” (d = 1) game G0 := Gkdf  -1
                                                                       n-KDFETSI-CatKDF,Σ,reqX ∧reqNoReal , and
finishing with the “random” (d = 0) game.
    We begin by replacing in game G0 all u values σ output by the source Σ at the beginning of the
game by independent random values σ of m octets each. Call this G1 . We can reduce this to the
pseudorandomness of the source by straightforwardly constructing an adversary B such that

                                         Pr [ G0 ] − Pr [ G1 ] ≤ Advpr
                                                                    Σ (B).

    In the next game hop to game G2 we immediately abort (and declare A to lose) if it queries its
random oracle HMAC on some input (L, secret) matching the input to HKDF.Extract in any of the
qRo$-KDF (A) + qKDF (A) challenge queries to oracle Ro$-KDF. Note that secret = k1 ∥ . . . ∥kn in all such
oracle queries, and according to requirement req1HKey there must be at least one honest input key ki .
Furthermore, this key is now an unknown random string of m octets by game G1 . This can be seen as
follows: For each query to the Ro$-KDF we map the vector (v1 , . . . , vn ) of indexes of input keys to a
vector of entries, either the index ji for honest keys, or the actual value ki for dishonest keys. We call
this the sanitized secret. Then we keep a random oracle table for such vectors (with the label in the first
entry) and pick a fresh value for each new query. It follows that the answer only depends on the index of
honest keys (and honest keys can only be assigned once, such that the index of honest keys points to a
specific dedicated content). Thus, the probability that any of the qRO (A) queries to the random oracle
coincides with any of these inputs, is at most

                      Pr [ G1 ] − Pr [ G2 ] ≤ qRO (A) · (qRo$-KDF (A) + qKDF (A)) · 2−8m .

   In the next game hop to G3 , we abort if there are two honest keys mapping to the same value. Since
there are at most u honest keys, we get by the birthday bound:

                                          Pr [ G2 ] − Pr [ G3 ] ≤ u2 · 2−8m .

    We say that two queries ((v1 , . . . , vn ), L), ((v1′ , . . . , vn′ ), L) of A to oracle Ro$-KDF for the same label
are equivalent if (v1 , . . . , vn ) and (v1′ , . . . , vn′ ) map to the same sanitized vector. Note that this means that
they coincide on indexes for honest keys and on the actual content of dishonest keys, even though the
indexes for dishonest keys may differ. Note that we can decide if two queries are equivalent by observing
the queries to oracle SetKey. Now, any two vectors (v1 , . . . , vn ), (v1′ , . . . , vn′ ) not in the same equivalence
class yield an independent random oracle value PRK output by HKDF.Extract. The reason is that, if the
vectors differ in indexes of honest keys, then they also differ in the secret value by the previous game.
And if they only differ in dishonest keys, then, as they do not lie in the same equivalence class, they must
have different values in the entries of dishonest keys. Furthermore, since A has never queried the random
oracle about the value secret, the adversary is perfectly oblivious about each PRK.
    In game G4 we let A lose if it either queries the random oracle HMAC about one of the extracted keys
PRK at some point or if two extracted keys collide. There are at most qRO (A) random oracle queries and
at most (qRo$-KDF (A) + qKDF (A)) extracted keys in total, each of octet size hl, such that the probability
of querying HMAC about such a value is at most qRO (A) · (qRo$-KDF (A) + qKDF (A)) · 2−8hl . Furthermore,
the independent random extracted keys collide with probability at most (qRo$-KDF (A) + qKDF (A))2 · 2−8hl .
Therefore,

                       Pr [ G3 ] − Pr [ G4 ] ≤ qRO (A) · (qRo$-KDF (A) + qKDF (A)) · 2−8hl
                                                  + (qRo$-KDF (A) + qKDF (A))2 · 2−8hl .

Note that collisions for different context information are impossible because fcontext injectively encodes
any context information. Furthermore, each evaluation in the iterations of HKDF.Expand appends a
fixed-size octet [i]1 for the counter, such that collisions within one expansion step cannot happen either.


                                                          22
               X3DH-KDF((dh1 , c1 ), (dh2 , c2 ), (dh3 , c3 ), (dh4 , c4 ), L = ε, ℓ = 256)
                1 If dh4 = ⊥ : secret ← dh1 ||dh2 ||dh3
                2 Else : secret ← dh1 ||dh2 ||dh3 ||dh4
                                                 hl
                3 K ← HKDF(F||secret, (0x00) , info, ℓ)
                4 Return K


Figure 7: Key derivation function in Signal’s X3DH handshake protocol, based on HKDF. F is a curve-
dependent constant, info is a fixed per-application label.


It follows that all evaluations of HMAC in the expansion step are for different inputs. Given in addition
that A never queries the random oracle HMAC on the extracted keys, the outputs of random oracle
HMAC in the expansion step are thus all independently and randomly distributed. It follows that the
winning probability of A in game G4 is upper bounded by the probability of winning the “random” game
(d = 0). Collecting the probabilities now yields the claim.

5.4     Signal X3DH: 4-KDF Combining Diffie–Hellman Secrets
Next, we take a look at the approach employed in Signal’s X3DH key exchange protocol [49] to combine
multiple Diffie–Hellman secrets. This combiner, which we denote as X3DH-KDF, is a 4-KDF (with optional
fourth input) built on top of HKDF as shown in Figure 7. Its purpose is to derive one shared secret from
three to four correlated elliptic-curve Diffie-Hellman secrets, all originating from the same DH source
(concretely, elliptic-curve DH secrets, all from either X25519 or X448). X3DH-KDF first concatenates the
DH secrets into a string secret, which is prepended with a constant F identifying the curve and then
used as the (single) input key material for HKDF. (Note that secret is uniquely encoded thanks to the
fixed length of the DH secrets.) The remaining inputs to HKDF are fixed to a constant-zero salt (0x00)hl ,
an application-specific label info, and an output length of ℓ = 32 bytes.
      In X3DH, parties hold three types of Diffie–Hellman keys: long-term keys (g a , g b , . . . ), semi-static
keys (g r , . . . ), and ephemeral keys (g x , g y , . . . ). A session key between two parties Alice and Bob is
derived using X3DH-KDF from dh1 = g ar , dh2 = g xb , dh3 = g xr , and (optionally) dh4 = g xy , where
g a , g x are Alice’s long-term and ephemeral shares and g b , g r , g y are Bob’s long-term, semi-static, and
ephemeral shares (where g y might not be available). We denote the Diffie–Hellman source underlying
X3DH for some group G of order q between p parties, each running at most s sessions and using at most
t many semi-static keys as ΣG,p,s,t                               G,p,s,t
                                    X3DH . A sample from ΣX3DH contains all pairwise combinations of the
parties’ long-term keys and semi-static keys (like σ = g ar ) as well as those between ephemeral keys and
long-term (g xb ), semi-static (g xr ), and ephemeral (g xy ) keys, respectively; i.e., u = p 2 t + p 2 s + p 2 st + ps 2
many entries. We assume that the order of these keys is known to an adversary, who can hence directly
index into the ΣG,p,s,t
                      X3DH sample to select any particular DH combination of its choice. X3DH does not use
context, so the context space of ΣG,p,s,tX3DH is Ctx = {ε}, but the auxiliary information α includes the DH
shares (e.g., g a , g r for a long-term–semi-static combination), reflecting that the adversary observes those
in the X3DH handshake.
      The source ΣG,p,s,t
                       X3DH is unpredictable, following for adversaries making a single prediction query only
from the computational Diffie–Hellman (CDH) assumption in G, and for general adversaries from the
gap Diffie–Hellman (GapDH) assumption in G, modulo a term accounting for colliding DH secrets. We
prove this in Appendix D.1.
Theorem 12 (KDF security of X3DH-KDF). Let X3DH-KDF be the 4-KDF in Figure 7. Let ΣG,p,s,t     X3DH be
the Diffie–Hellman source underlying X3DH as defined above, let Σ be the (4, 1)-source collection based
on ΣG,p,s,t
     X3DH , and model HMAC as a random oracle. Then for any adversary A against the KDF security
of X3DH-KDF, there exists an adversary B (making one Predict query) such that
                                                                                  up
                X3DH-KDF,Σ,reqN (A) ≤ 4qNewKey (A) · qSetKey (A) + 4qRO (A) · AdvΣG,p,s,t (B).
            Advkdf
                                                                           
                                                                                                  X3DH


Proof. Recall that HKDF is defined based on HMAC, so given the fixed output length ℓ = 32 bytes, the
key derivation on line 3, Figure 7 can be rewritten as
                          K ← HMAC( HMAC((0x00)hl , F||secret), info||0x01 )[1..32].
Since X3DH-KDF does not use a label (permitting only a single Ro$-KDF call for any combination of
secrets) and the outer HMAC call uses a constant second input, we can focus for security on the inner


                                                               23
HMAC call: if that inner call yields a value PRK, independent and indistinguishable from random for
each Ro$-KDF call, then the output of the outer call is also indistinguishable from random, since HMAC
is modeled as a random oracle and inner and outer calls are domain-separated (via F and info).
    We first apply Proposition 7 to construct an adversary A′ which does not make any queries to oracle
KDF, and for which

                         X3DH-KDF,Σ,reqN (A) ≤ 2 · AdvX3DH-KDF,Σ,reqN ∧reqNoReal (A ) .
                                                                                   ′
                      Advkdf                          kdf


For the other oracles, A′ has query counts qOr (A′ ) = qOr (A) for Or ∈ {NewKey, SetKey} and
qRo$-KDF (A′ ) = qRo$-KDF (A) + qKDF (A).
     The proof then proceeds via a sequence of games G0 –G2 . Game G0 is identical to Gkdf -1
                                                                                       X3DH-KDF,Σ,reqN ∧reqNoReal ,
i.e., the “real” n-KDF game, with HMAC modeled as a random oracle.
     Next, let game G1 be identical to G0 , except that of computing the inner HMAC values PRK =
HMAC((0x00)hl , F||secret), these are replaced with independent and uniform values PRK ←$ Ohl . This
change can be detected by A′ only through (1) forcing a collision between the secret values in two
Ro$-KDF calls, or (2) making a random oracle query of the form ((0x00)hl , F||secret) involving the
value secret used in an Ro$-KDF call. Call these two events bad1 and bad2 , respectively, then Pr[G0 ] ≤
Pr[G1 ] + Pr[bad1 ∨ bad2 ]. Observe that due to the format of secret and collisions among dishonest key
material being disallowed by reqNoDColl , bad1 can only be triggered by colliding honest key material, or
across dishonest and honest key material.
     We bound Pr[bad1 ∨ bad2 ] via a reduction B to the unpredictability of ΣG,p,s,t
                                                                                X3DH as follows. Instead of
sampling a source key material itself, B uses the auxiliary information obtained in the unpredictability
game to simulate NewKey queries. It answers all Ro$-KDF queries by sampling the inner HMAC
value PRK at random. When A′ stops, B picks at random b ∈ {1, 2} as well as one of the key material
indexes j which A′ registered via the NewKey oracle.
   • If b = 1, B further picks at random one of the SetKey queries A′ made, with source key material σi .
     It queries (j, σi ) to its Predict oracle. If A′ triggers bad1 via colliding dishonest and honest key
     material, then B will pick these with probability qNewKey (A)·q
                                                                 1
                                                                     SetKey (A)
                                                                                . If honest key material collides,
     B immediately wins the unpredictability anyway.
   • If b = 2, B further picks at random one of the random oracle queries of the form HMAC((0x00)hl , F||secret)
     that A′ made. It parses secret = dh1 ||dh2 ||dh3 ||dh4 (where dh4 ) is optional, picks one of the dh
     values at random, and queries (j, dh) to its Predict oracle.
     If A′ triggers bad2 , then we know that one random oracle call is on a value secret = dh1 ||dh2 ||dh3 ||dh4
     (with dh4 optional) used in an Ro$-KDF call. By req1HKey , we know that one of the involved
     dhi secrets must be honest, i.e., corresponding to the secret registered via some NewKey query.
     Hence with probability 4·qNewKey (A)·q
                                        1
                                            RO (A)
                                                   , B will pick the index of the honest secret involved and
     the random oracle call in which A queries it, winning the unpredictability game.
Combining both cases, we have

                Pr[bad1 ∨ bad2 ] ≤ Pr[bad1 ] + Pr[bad2 ]
                                 ≤ 2qNewKey (A) · (qSetKey (A) + 4qRO (A)) · Advup
                                                                                ΣG,p,s,t
                                                                                         (B).
                                                                                       X3DH


   Finally, in game G2 , we replace all responses to Ro$-KDF queries with random, uniform strings of
length 32 bytes. Since, in the outer HMAC computation, the first inputs at this point are independent
random strings of octet length hl and the second inputs are a constant, this does not change the view
of A′ , hence Pr[G2 ] = Pr[G3 ]. Observing that G2 is equivalent to to the “random” n-KDF game
     -0
  X3DH-KDF,Σ,reqN ∧reqNoReal establishes the bound.
Gkdf
Remark 13. We note that Signal’s X3DH-KDF could achieve tighter kdf security if it included the Diffie–
Hellman shares as context in the inner HMAC call (i.e., HKDF.Extract), in some unambiguous way. (This
is akin to the random-oracle–based n-KDF construction discussed in Section 5.1.) That way, the reduction
to unpredictability in the proof of Theorem 12 would not need to guess which honest key corresponds to
which random oracle query made by the adversary: Seeing the DH shares as context in an HMAC random
oracle call, it could directly identify the corresponding key material and make one Predict query on
that key material (per random oracle query of A). This strategy avoids the 4 · qNewKey (A) · qRO (A) loss
in the bound, which can be notable in practical terms, relying on the GapDH instead of CDH assumption
for multi-challenge unpredictability (cf. Lemma 31).


                                                       24
                     CtX[Combine, Expand]((σ1 , c1 ), . . . , (σn , cn ), L, ℓ)
                      1 PRK ← Combine((σ1 , c1 ), . . . , (σn , cn ), ε, ℓPRK )
                      2 K ← Expand(PRK, L, ℓ)
                      3 Return K


Figure 8: Combine-then-Expand (CtX) construction CtX[Combine, Expand] of an n-KDF from
comb-KDF Combine and function family Expand.


   This approach would mirror tight proof strategies in the random oracle model for Diffie–Hellman key
exchange [26]. Context being included in the key derivation has also been assumed in a tight security
analysis of a variant of X3DH by Kiltz et al. [43]. It is further in line with recommendations from recent
analyses of Signal’s post-quantum handshake PQXDH [11, 37].


6     The Combine-then-Expand Paradigm
From the analyses of real-world constructions of multi-input KDFs in the previous section, we can observe
a general two-step approach to building n-KDFs.
Combine. First, the multiple input key materials are combined into a single, pseudorandom value PRK
    (taking the context into account). In the MLS n-KDF (see Figure 5), this is done by cascading
    applications of HMAC to produce a value psk_secretn . In ETSI-CatKDF and Signal’s X3DH-KDF
    (Figures 6 and 7), this is done via first concatenating the source key material (and in ETSI-CatKDF
    hashing the context) and then applying HKDF.Extract inside HKDF, producing a pseudorandom key.
Expand. Second, PRK is expanded into the desired output-key length, incorporating the label. This is
     analogous to the expand step in HKDF’s Extract-then-Expand (XtX) paradigm, and indeed both
     ETSI-CatKDF and Signal use HKDF.Expand for this purpose, keyed with PRK. MLS, deriving only
     a single key of fixed length without any label input, skips this step and directly uses PRK derived
     in Combine as the output (i.e., Expand is simply the identity function).
We call this paradigm “Combine-then-Expand” (CtX), and formalize it as a generic construction
CtX[Combine, Expand] of an n-KDF from two functions Combine and Expand, as shown in Figure 8 (see
also Figure 1 for an illustration). Syntactically, Combine is what we call a “comb-KDF”: an n-KDF with
no label input and fixed output length ℓPRK = |PRK| (see Definition 5), and Expand : {0, 1}ℓPRK × Lbls ×
KLout → B∗ is a function family.
    The careful reader will notice that the real-world constructions we have seen do not always fully align
with the formalized version of CtX in Figure 8. MLS and Signal both derive only a single output key
of fixed length, hence the Expand step is somewhat degenerate: in Signal, it only takes a hard-coded
“info” string and fixed output length; in MLS, there is no Expand step at all (i.e., it is the identity
function). ETSI-CatKDF indeed uses HKDF.Expand in the general sense to derive multiple keys from the
combined key material, via label and length inputs, but also includes the context values there, not in the
Combine step along with the source key material. Consequently, we gave tailored analyses for the n-KDF
constructions used in MLS, Signal, and ETSI-CatKDF in the prior section. Nevertheless, going forward,
we deem the CtX paradigm a valuable blueprint for designing new multi-input KDFs.
    Concretely, we show that the CtX[Combine, Expand] construction yields a secure XOF- or NOF-n-KDF
if the Combine function is a secure fixLℓ-KDF (fixed label and length) and the Expand function is a
(multi-user) secure variable-output-length PRF (vol-PRF , see Appendix A.2 for the formal definition) of
type XOF or NOF, respectively. Importantly, the requirement for Combine, being an n-KDF that produces
a single, fixed-length key (with no label input), is notably easier to achieve (and can be constructed
from other primitives than hash functions, as we explore in the next section). For the Expand step,
candidates for variable-output-length PRFs readily exist, with HKDF.Expand being a prime example of
an extendable-output vol-PRF.
Theorem 14 (n-KDF security of CtX). Let Combine be a comb-KDF with output length ℓPRK ∈ N, let
Expand : {0, 1}ℓPRK × Lbls × KLout → {0, 1}∗ be a function family and let C = CtX[Combine, Expand] be
the n-KDF built from Combine, Expand as defined in Figure 8. Then for any source collection Σ and
requirement req =⇒ reqX ∨ reqN from Table 1, and any adversary A against the kdf security of C, there



                                                            25
exist adversaries B1 , B2 such that
                                                                            vol-prf
                    C,Σ,req (A) ≤ 2 · AdvCombine,Σ,req∧reqNoReal (B1 ) + AdvExpand,type (B2 ) ,
                 Advkdf                  kdf
                                                                                             

where type = XOF if req =⇒ reqX and type = NOF if req =⇒ reqN . Adversaries B1 , B2 have
roughly the same running time as A. Adversary B1 makes the same number of queries to oracles
NewKey, SetKey as A, and at most qRo$-KDF (A) + qKDF (A) to oracle Ro$-KDF. Adversary B2
makes at most qRo$-KDF (A) + qKDF (A) queries to each of its oracles.
Proof. We assume without loss of generality that adversary A does not violate requirement req; if it
did, it would have an advantage of 0, making the claimed bound trivially true. To begin with, we apply
Proposition 7 to add requirement reqNoReal to req, effectively removing oracle KDF from the game. The
reason is that the intermediate key PRK might be shared across calls to Ro$-KDF and KDF (if they
differ only in the label or length inputs), but the vol-PRF security game does not provide a “real” function
oracle. Hence, the final reduction to the vol-PRF security of Expand would not be able to simulate
responses to queries to oracle KDF in these cases. Proposition 7 gives us an adversary B making the
same number of queries as A to {NewKey, SetKey} and qRo$-KDF (A) + qKDF (A) queries to oracle
Ro$-KDF, such that
                                      C,Σ,req (A) ≤ 2 · AdvC,Σ,req∧reqNoReal (B) .
                                 Advkdf                    kdf


Adversary B additionally does not violate req ∧ reqNoReal , by assumption on A.
   The proof now proceeds through a sequence of games G0 –G2 , which all run adversary B and provide
the oracles named in the n-KDF game in Figure 3. Let req∗ := req ∧ reqNoReal . Game G0 is identical
to Gkdf -1                                                                                  kdf -1
     C,Σ,req∗ , that is, the “real” n-KDF game without oracle KDF. Hence Pr[G0 ] = Pr[GC,Σ,req∗ ].
Game G1 only differs from G0 in oracle Ro$-KDF, where instead of computing the key K as

                               PRK ← Combine((σ1 , c1 ), . . . , (σn , cn ), ε, ℓPRK )
                                   K ← Expand(PRK, L, ℓ),

the key PRK for Expand is replaced by a consistently sampled random string in BℓPRK , with consis-
tency maintained with a table T[(v1 , . . . , vn )] indexed by the source key material indexes input to
oracle Ro$-KDF by the adversary.
   We construct an adversary B1 against the fixLℓ-kdf security of Combine such that

                                                         Combine,Σ,req∗ (B1 ),
                                  Pr[G0 ] − Pr[G1 ] ≤ Advkdf                                                   (4)

as follows. Adversary B1 runs adversary B, acting as the challenger in game G0 , with the following
differences. B1 does not sample any source key material. Instead, it simulates queries to oracle NewKey by
forwarding them to its own oracle NewKey. It similarly relays queries to oracle SetKey. When B makes a
query Ro$-KDF((v1 , . . . , vn ), L, ℓ), adversary B1 uses its own Ro$-KDF to populate table T[(v1 , . . . , vn )].
That is, it checks if the table entry is initialized; if not, it initializes it with the key returned from
Ro$-KDF((v1 , . . . , vn ), ε, ℓPRK ), i.e., the forwarded query from B to its own oracle, stripped of label and
with fixed length. It then sets PRK ← T[(v1 , . . . , vn )], proceeding as the challenger in game G0 .
    This way, adversary B1 perfectly simulates game G1−d when playing the fixLℓ-kdf game with
bit parameter d. Adversary B1 has query count qOr (B1 ) = qOr (B) = qOr (A) for oracles Or ∈
{NewKey, SetKey}, and qRo$-KDF (B1 ) ≤ qRo$-KDF (B) = qRo$-KDF (A) + qKDF (A) Furthermore, B1
satisfies requirements req ∧ reqNoReal , assuming that B also does. For all requirements except reqNOF or
reqXOF , this follows directly from B not violating the requirement. For the freshness condition, we observe
that thanks to the table T, adversary B1 never repeats a query to oracle Ro$-KDF, hence fulfilling both
reqNOF and reqXOF . This proves Equation (4).
    We proceed with the final game hop. Game G2 is identical to G1 , except that instead of computing K as
K ← Expand(PRK, L, ℓ) in oracle Ro$-KDF, K is sampled consistently at random in Bℓ . We construct
an adversary B2 against the vol-PRF security of Expand such that

                                    Pr[G1 ] − Pr[G2 ] ≤ Advvol-prf
                                                           Expand,type (B1 ),                                  (5)

where type = XOF if req =⇒ reqX and type = NOF if req =⇒ reqN . Adversary B2 runs B, acting as
the challenger in game G1 , with two exceptions when adversary B issues an Ro$-KDF((v1 , . . . , vn ), L, ℓ)
query. First, instead of sampling PRK in BℓPRK to populate the table T[(v1 , . . . , vn )] (if not already
populated), adversary B2 queries oracle New in its own game to initialize a new key for Expand and
stores the index of the key in T[(v1 , . . . , vn )]. Second, instead of computing Expand(PRK, L, ℓ) itself, B2


                                                         26
                                    σ1               σ2               σ1



                      0bl           BC               BC               BC            k


                     Figure 9: Key combiner for two keys based on blockcipher BC.


queries oracle Fn(T[(v1 , . . . , vn )], L, ℓ) to compute K. When adversary B halts and outputs a bit guess,
B2 also halts and returns the same bit.
   This way, adversary B2 perfectly simulates game G1 and G2 for B when the bit parameter d in
the vol-PRF game is 1 and 0, respectively. Furthermore, if the queries by B satisfy reqX , adversary
B2 will never make two queries Fn(i, L, ℓ) and Fn(i, L, ℓ′ ) such that ℓ =    ̸ ℓ′ (as such a query would
only be triggered by a query from B which violated reqXOF ). This proves Equation (5). Adversary B2
has query count qNew (B2 ) ≤ qRo$-KDF (B) = qRo$-KDF (A) + qKDF (A) and qFn (B2 ) = qRo$-KDF (B) =
qRo$-KDF (A) + qKDF (A).


7     New Constructions
We discuss two new approaches to building multi-input KDFs. The first construction uses a simple
key-mixing step, which can be implemented with key-collision-resistant blockciphers, and only requires a
variable-output-length pseudorandom function on top, enabling a purely blockcipher-based design. The
second approach shows how to build a multi-input KDF that achieves information-theoretic security if
one of the key material sources is statistically secure, e.g., if generated via a quantum key distribution
protocol. Both approaches do not make use of hash functions, addressing scenarios where only a limited
set of building blocks is available due to system limitations or design requirements.

7.1    Blockcipher-Based Construction
The idea for the two-input blockcipher-based construction is to first define a simple key combiner function,
mixing the two (pseudorandom) keys σ1 and σ2 via blockcipher BC : {0, 1}kl × {0, 1}bl → {0, 1}bl into
a single, strong key. Then we apply a simple variable-output-length pseudorandom function to this
derived key and the context information, label, and desired output length. This variable-output-length
pseudorandom function can, for example, be the CMAC construction by NIST [23], yielding a solution
that is entirely based on a blockcipher. Note that we thus slightly diverge from our general CtX paradigm
discussed in Section 6 in the sense that we mix in the context information only in the expansion step,
owing to the fact that we use a blockcipher for the combining step, which thus does not take context
input. For “empty” context information security of our construction here already follows from the more
general CtX result.
    Besides the pseudorandomness, the security of our construction hinges on the key-collision resistance
of the blockcipher [12]. This means that it should be infeasible to find an input x ∈ {0, 1}bl and distinct
keys k, k ′ ∈ {0, 1}kl such that BC(k, x) = BC(k ′ , x). The absence of such collisions is also commonly used
in practical schemes for so-called key check values (KCVs), with the goal to ensure the integrity of the
key by comparing (truncated) blockcipher outputs for constant inputs like 0bl . We note that key-collision
resistance already follows from collision-resistance of the blockcipher used in Davies–Meyer mode [55],
h(k, x) = BC(k, x) ⊕ x. Any key collision as above for the same input value x thus also yields a collision
for the Davies–Meyer hash function.
Definition 15 (Key-collision resistance of blockcipher). For an adversary A denote by Advkcr     BC (A) the
probability that A outputs (k, k ′ , x) ∈ {0, 1}kl × {0, 1}kl × {0, 1}bl such that BC(k, x) = BC(k ′ , x) and
k ̸= k ′ .

    We describe the blockcipher-based KDF construction formally as a 2-KDF for combining two uniform
keys, illustrated in Figure 9 and defined in pseudocode in Figure 10. We assume that the source
collection Σ outputs pseudorandom strings σ of kl bits. Other sources may require another intermediate
step to first derive such (pseudo)random key material. The key mixing step applies the blockcipher three
times in a row, starting with input 0bl and computing the key k ← BC(σ1 , BC(σ2 , BC(σ1 , 0bl ))) for the


                                                     27
                      BC-KDF[BC, Expand]((σ1 , c1 ), (σ2 , c2 ), L, ℓ)
                       1 k ← BC(σ1 , BC(σ2 , BC(σ1 , 0bl )))
                       2 K ← Expand(k, ⟨L, c1 , c2 ⟩, ℓ)
                       3 Return K


Figure 10: Construction BC-KDF[BC, Expand] based on block cipher BC : {0, 1}kl × {0, 1}bl → {0, 1}bl
and variable-output-length PRF Expand : {0, 1}bl × {0, 1}∗ × N → {0, 1}∗ . Note that context information
forms part of the label input to the vol-PRF Expand.


key material σ1 and σ2 . Then it runs the vol-PRF Expand on this key k and the joint context information,
the label, and the length parameter.
     The idea of the key-mixing approach is that if the second key σ2 is honest, then the block cipher input
to the last round is pseudorandom and thus is k. If the adversary queries for the same material σ2 again,
but for a different dishonest key σ1′ , then key-collision-resistance of the innermost evaluation ensures
that the input to the middle evaluation BC(σ2 , ·) is new, and that the evaluation of the blockcipher
for σ2 yields a fresh pseudorandom string. If, vice versa, the middle key σ2 is dishonest but σ1 is
honest, then key-collision-resistance of the second evaluation guarantees that two queries for distinct
dishonest keys σ2 , σ2′ for the same value σ1 yield distinct inputs to the final evaluation BC(σ1 , ·), ensuring
pseudorandomness of the output.
     To formalize this, we also require pseudorandomness of the blockcipher for secret key k. To simplify,
and since we only need to compute the blockcipher in the forward direction, we define pseudorandomness
via indistinguishability from pseudorandom functions, implicitly including a PRP/PRF switch [10]. See
Definition 20 in Appendix A.1 for the formalization of PRF security. In addition, we consider the
(2, 1)-source (collection) Σ which outputs a vector consisting of pseudorandom key material σi of bit size
kl. Note that the context information is arbitrary.
     The following theorem shows that the construction is secure if BC is a pseudorandom, key-collision-
resistant blockcipher and Expand is a secure vol-PRF. The resulting KDF inherits the type (XOF/NOF)
from Expand. For technical reasons in the reduction, we need to move the context information into the
label field when evaluating Expand, as it is done, for instance, in TLS 1.3 [56] and also in the NIST
proposals [23] anyway.
Theorem 16 (KDF security based on blockcipher). Let Expand be a vol-PRF of type T ∈ {XOF, NOF}
and BC be a blockcipher. Let req be reqX for T = XOF and be reqN for T = NOF. Consider
BC-KDF[BC, Expand] as in Figure 10. Then for a pseudorandom source (collection) Σ = (Σ) with output
length u and any adversary A against the kdf security of BC-KDF[BC, Expand], making at most qSetKey (A)
queries to oracle SetKey and at most qRo$-KDF (A) + qKDF (A) queries to oracles Ro$-KDF and KDF
in total, there exists adversaries B1 , B2 , B3 , and B4 such that

                BC-KDF[BC,Expand],Σ,req (A)
             Advkdf
                           ≤ 2 · Advpr                         prf           vol-prf
                                    Σ (B1 ) + AdvBC (B2 ) + AdvBC (B3 ) + AdvExpand,T (B4 ) ,
                                                 kcr
                                                                                           

where adversaries B1 , B2 , B3 , B4 have roughly the same running time as A. Furthermore, adversary
B3 against the pseudorandomness of BC, as well as adversary B4 against the variable-output-length
pseudorandomness of Expand, each make at most u · qSetKey (A) calls to their oracle New and at most
qRo$-KDF (A) + qKDF (A) calls to their oracle Fn.
Proof. To simplify the proof we first assume that A does not make any queries to oracle KDF, costing us
a factor 2 in the bound, but keeping the sum qRo$-KDF (A) + qKDF (A) of queries to oracles Ro$-KDF and
KDF unchanged. We continue to bound the advantage of A through a sequence of game hops, beginning
with the “real” (d = 1) game G0 := Gkdf     -1
                                         BC-KDF[BC,Expand],Σ,req , and finishing with the “random” game for
d = 0.
    In game G1 we replace the pseudorandom outputs of the source (collection) Σ = (Σ) by truly random
key material σi of the corresponding length. The pseudorandomness of the source gives us

                                        Pr [ G0 ] − Pr [ G1 ] ≤ Advpr
                                                                   Σ (B1 )

where B1 simulates A’s attack with the help of its (random or pseudorandom) sample z, outputting 1 if
and only if A succeeds in the simulated attack.


                                                          28
    In game G2 we immediately stop if the adversary, during the attack, ever generates a key-collision
in the step for computing k (line 1 of Figure 10) in an oracle call to Ro$-KDF. That is, for different
keys σb , σb′ and the same input x (where x = 0bl or x = BC(σ1 , 0bl )) we have BC(σb , x) = BC(σb′ , x). We
implement this in the game by keeping track of all intermediate values when evaluating the BC chain and
abort if we find such a collision. To bound the probability of A causing such a key-collision in game G2
we argue via the key-collision resistance of BC:

                                                                BC (B2 ).
                                     Pr [ G1 ] − Pr [ G2 ] ≤ Advkcr

    In game G3 we next replace all evaluations of BC in the key mixing step (line 1) for each honest key
material σ by a random function (but consistently, i.e., for same key σ and same input with the same
value as before). The random functions are implemented via tables Tσ [·] and efficient look-ups. Note
that for dishonest σ we still compute BC as before. Furthermore, we still adhere to the checking for
collisions in the intermediate values, now for the modified evaluations of the blockcipher. It follows from
the pseudorandomness of BC that this is indistinguishable, i.e., since this corresponds exactly to the
difference in the pseudorandomness game, there exists an algorithm B3 such that

                                     Pr [ G2 ] − Pr [ G3 ] ≤ Advprf
                                                                BC (B3 ).

Note that there are at most u honest key material values σ, and each value can be assigned at most once.
In total, adversary B3 thus makes at most u calls to its oracle New in the (multi-user) PRF game, and
at most qRo$-KDF (A) + qKDF (A) evaluation requests to oracle Fn.
    Now we observe that each call to oracle Ro$-KDF for indexes v1 , v2 must point to at least one honest
key according to requirement req1HKey . Hence, the evaluation of the most outer honest key (either σ2
for a dishonest σ1 , or σ1 if σ2 is honest or dishonest) in each such call is always for a new input value
by the previous games, if the other key changes. It follows that the output of such an evaluation is an
independent random value, denoted as K(σ1 ,σ2 ) . This also holds for a dishonest outer value σ1 because
we then apply the final blockcipher evaluation BC(σ1 , ·) for the chosen key to the random output Tσ2 [·]
for honest key σ2 . Here we use the fact that σ1 is set by the adversary before the first call to Ro$-KDF
and thus independent of the random function value.
    We would now like to proceed to G4 and replace the evaluation results of the variable-output-length
PRF Expand by random variables in calls to oracle Ro$-KDF, using the fact that the key for Expand is
already random according to the previous game, i.e., that each pair of key material (σ1 , σ2 ) with one
honest key maps to a random string K(σ1 ,σ2 ) . However, the adversary may register identical (dishonest)
key material σ under different key indexes ν and ν ′ via oracle SetKey; we only disallow the adversary
to duplicate entire inputs (σ, c) via requirement reqNoDColl , but here only the context information may,
for instance, change. Fortunately, our reduction B4 to the pseudorandomness of Expand can easily
track such cases, since the key material contents of dishonest keys are known. Hence, adversary B4 can
define a mapping of indexes (v1 , v2 ) passed to oracle Ro$-KDF to the corresponding key pair identifier,
Kmap(v1 , v2 ) = (j1 , j2 ); for dishonest keys it even knows the key material σ in addition to the index.
    With game G4 we next replace all evaluations of the variable-output-length PRF Expand in the
simulated calls of A to oracle Ro$-KDF by random values (but consistently). To argue the validity of
this modification, we can build an adversary B4 against the (multi-user) security of Expand. Adversary B4
creates a new key in its game via a call for New for each pair (v1 , v2 ) mapping to a new pair Kmap(v1 , v2 ).
Since each of the entries in the source vector z can be assigned only once to a key position, and adversary A
sets at most qSetKey (A) dishonest keys, there can be at most u · qSetKey (A) keys in B4 ’s game. Adversary
B4 then maps the pair Kmap(v1 , v2 ) in A’s attack to one of these generated keys. Algorithm B4 simply
uses oracle access to the vol-PRF security game to simulate the game of A now, encoding the (public)
context information as part of the label. It eventually outputs 1 iff A wins.
    Note that B4 has another stipulation (only) in case of a XOF, namely, that it never repeats the same
query (i, L) for key index i and label L for different length parameters. We argue that this must be the
case if A successfully plays against the KDF of type XOF. To this end we observe that requirement
reqXOF for A demands that in any two calls to the Ro$-KDF oracle the pairs (v, L), (v′ , L′ ) differ. If
the labels L, L′ in such queries are distinct, then the label field in B4 ’s calls (encoding L, c1 , and c2 in a
recoverable way) must also be distinct. Assume next that the labels L = L′ match, such that the indexes
must differ. Then, adversary B4 will only map this to the same key index i in its simulation via Kmap if
both indexes include dishonest indexes vb ̸= vb′ at the same position b, holding the same key material
σ. But then requirement reqNoDColl for XOF KDFs ensures that the context information c for both keys
must differ (because position and key material already match). This, however, implies that B4 encodes


                                                      29
      ITS-KDF[F]((σ1 , c1 ), . . . , (σn , cn ), L, ℓ)
           Assume σn = σnkdf ∥σnits where |σnits | = ℓits ≥ ℓ
                                     kdf
       1 k ← F((σ1 , c1 ), . . . , (σn , cn ), L, ℓ)
                        its
       2 Return k ⊕ σn [1..ℓ]


      Figure 11: Construction ITS-KDF[F] based on KDF F, achieving information-theoretic security.


different values in its label ⟨L, c1 , c2 ⟩ for both queries, such that it does not violate the XOF property in
its pseudorandomness game.
    We conclude that pseudorandom answers of B4 ’s evaluation oracle correspond then to G3 , and random
answers to game G4 , and that B4 successfully distinguishes the cases if A wins in the corresponding game:

                                            Pr [ G3 ] − Pr [ G4 ] ≤ Advvol-prf
                                                                       Expand,T (B4 ).

Note that in the final game, all of the responses of oracle Ro$-KDF are random and correspond to
     -0
 BC-KDF[BC,Expand],Σ,req . This proves the theorem.
Gkdf
   We observe that the above construction can be generalized to accommodate more keys. Given that
one has already applied the key mixing step for n − 1 keys, then one processes the resulting key with
the final key in an additional key mixing step. That is, one first combines the first two keys and then
combines the result with the third key, and so on. The more direct alternative is to use a scheduling of
keys in order σ1 , σ2 , . . . , σn , σ1 , . . . , σn−1 and apply the blockcipher for this sequence.

7.2     Achieving Information-Theoretic Security
We propose here a simple construction for combining two or more cryptographic keys. This construction
might be of special interest to Quantum Key Distribution (QKD) networks and similar settings, where
one source generates truly random output, but is hedged by also using classical and/or post-quantum
cryptographic key exchange mechanisms on top. The interesting feature of our construction is that the
resulting key is truly random, as long as at least one dedicated source (say, the source mapping to position
n, for the sake of concreteness) of key material is truly random. Needless to say, this key material can
only be used once. Besides achieving this stronger security guarantee, the construction preserves the
usual security of multi-input key derivation functions: If at least one input is (computationally) secure,
then so is the combined key, even if the key material is used multiple times.
     The construction is depicted in Figure 11. The idea is to split the potentially information-theoretically
secure key material σn into two parts, one short part σnkdf of ℓkdf bits entering the key combiner with
the other key material, and the other part σnits of ℓits which is then added to the output of the combiner.
Note that, for the standard (maximum exposure) security of the n-KDF, it is necessary to include some
input of the source σn into the combiner evaluation, otherwise the adversary could leave the honest key
material σn fixed and change the other n − 1 keys using the SetKey oracle to distinguish two answers
from random.
     The proof follows by reduction to the security of the underlying n-KDF, using only the portion σnkdf
of this source as input. For a source collection Σ, we thus define a collection Σ′ where we modify the
source i = Σ-map(n) corresponding to input position n by (a) truncating all source key material zi [j].σ for
j = 1, 2, . . . , u in the sample to the first ℓkdf bits, and (b) augmenting the respective auxiliary information
zi [j].α with the remaining ℓits bits. Note that, in general, the key material parts can be correlated,
although they are independent in the information-theoretic case.
Theorem 17 (KDF security of ITS-KDF). Let F : (Skm1 × Ctx1 ) × . . . × (Skmn × Ctxn ) × Lbls × KLout →
{0, 1}∗ be a n-KDF with maximum output length ℓits ∈ KLout and consider ITS-KDF[F] as defined in
Figure 11. Then, for any source collection Σ = (Σ1 , . . . , Σr ) such that Σr maps only to position n, and
such that ∀σ ∈ Σr .Skm: |σ| = a + ℓits , where a is the maximum length of any element in F.Skmn , for
the source collection Σ′ defined as above, for any requirement req =⇒ reqX ∨ reqN from Table 1 (in
particular, this may include reqHybrid (S) for any S ⊆ [1..r]), and any adversary A against the kdf security
of ITS-KDF[F], there exists an adversary B such that

                                             ITS-KDF[F],Σ,req (A) ≤ AdvF,Σ′ ,req (B) .
                                          Advkdf                       kdf


Adversary B has roughly the same running time as A.


                                                               30
Proof. The proof is a straightforward reduction to the security of the underlying F. Let game G0 be
equivalent to Gkdf       -1
                     ITS-KDF[F],Σ,req (the “real” KDF game) and consider G1 , which is identical to G0 , except
that in response to Ro$-KDF queries, the intermediate key k is not computed via F, but replaced with
consistently sampled random strings of length ℓ. Now, we first claim that G1 is equivalent to the “random”
KDF game Gkdf         -1
                   ITS-KDF[F],Σ,req . To see this, note that independent of the value of σn , the distribution of
                                                                                          its

k ⊕ σnits [1..ℓ] is the same as k when k is uniformly random. Hence,

                                     ITS-KDF[F],Σ,req (A) ≤ Pr [ G0 (A) ] − Pr [ G1 (A) ] .
                                  Advkdf                                                                                    (6)

    Now, we construct an adversary B against F and source collection Σ′ such that

                                                                          F,Σ′ ,req (B) .
                                       Pr [ G0 (A) ] − Pr [ G1 (A) ] ≤ Advkdf                                               (7)

Adversary B acts as the challenger in game G0 , with the following differences.
    Instead of sampling key material from the sources in response to NewKey query ν from A, adversary
B forwards the query to its own NewKey oracle. For queries pertaining to Σr , adversary B stores σnits
from the auxiliary information for later, indexed by ν. Queries to oracle SetKey are similarly relayed
to the SetKey oracle of B, except when adversary A makes a query SetKey(n, σn , c), i.e., for position
p = n. Then, for query ν, adversary B first splits the source key material into σnkdf ∥σnits , checks if σnkdf
has been used in a previous SetKey query ν ′ for position n, and if not forwards (n, σnkdf , c) to its own
SetKey oracle. (This way, it does not repeat queries to SetKey, which could violate reqNoDColl .) B
stores the index of the SetKey query (ν or ν ′ ) together with σnits for later, indexed by ν.
    When adversary A makes a query ((v1 , . . . , vn ), L, ℓ) to oracle Ro$-KDF or KDF, adversary B
forwards it to its own corresponding oracle, but adapts the query as follows. For dishonest key material
in position n, it checks among its stored SetKey entries if vn maps to ν = vn or another key index ν ′ ; in
the latter case it replaces vn with ν ′ and checks is it has already made the query ((v1 , . . . , ν ′ ), L, ℓ). If so,
it reuses the result k from that prior query, otherwise it forwards the query to the oracle. (This is to
ensure that B satisfies the freshness and one-timeness requirements.) When adversary B receives k in
response, it returns k ⊕ σnits [1..ℓ] to A, where σnits is the key material stored by B for the vn -th NewKey
or SetKey oracle query by A, as described above.
    When adversary A halts and returns a bit d ∗ , B also halts and outputs the same bit. Note that, by
construction, B satisfies the requirement req if A does. (In particular, it never repeats key material in
a query unless A does, and will use honest key material in the same positions as A.) Furthermore, if
the Ro$-KDF returns real F values (d = 1 in B’s game), then B perfectly simulates G0 for A. If, on the
other hand, B’s oracle Ro$-KDF gives random answers, then B simulates game G1 . This establishes
Equation (7). Combining Equations (6) and (7) gives the theorem bound.
   We can also show security for unbounded adversaries A if we assume that σn is truly uniform. In this
case we would require A to adhere to predicate req1×Key ({r}) where as above source r is used in position
n. The desired result follows immediately, as the xor operation with a one-time uniform key is a one-time
pad, making the output of ITS-KDF indistinguishable from a randomly sampled string of the same length.


8      From KDF Security to Key Exchange Security
We conclude by putting our KDF notion to action, demonstrating that it can elegantly cover the core
of a passive security proof of a KEM+KEM-combiner key exchange protocol, such as the one given in
Figure 12. We first give a definition of KEM sources and show (in Appendix A.4) that IND-CPA-secure
KEMs yield pseudorandom sources. Then, we reduce the key exchange security of the combiner to KDF
security.
Definition 18 (p × s KEM source). A p × s KEM source for a key encapsulation mechanism KEM =
(KGen, Encaps, Decaps) with key length m is the correlated probability distribution over {0, 1}m × {0, 1}∗ ×
Aux generated by a sampler Σ with sample size u = p · s for p, s ∈ N, with the following properties:
    1. Σ samples (pk i , sk i ) ←$ KEM.KGen(), for i ∈ [p].
    2. Σ computes (ci,j , Ki,j ) ←$ KEM.Encaps(pk i ), for (i, j) ∈ [p] × [s].

    3. Σ outputs (K1,1 , (pk 1 , c1,1 ), α1,1 ), (K1,2 , (pk 1 , c1,2 ), α1,2 ), . . . , (Kp,s , (pk p , cp,s ), αp,s ) .
                                                                                                                       




                                                                   31
                 Party A (knows pk B )                               Party B (knows sk B )
                 (pk A , sk A ) ←$ KEM.KGen()
                                                        pk A ,cB
                 (cB , KB ) ←$ KEM.Encaps(pk B )         −→          KB ← KEM.Decaps(sk B , cB )
                                                          cA
                 KA ← KEM.Decaps(sk A , cA )             ←−          (cA , KA ) ←$ KEM.Encaps(pk A )

                             K ← 2-KDF((KA , (pk A , cA )), (KB , (pk B , cB )), ”key”, kl)

Figure 12: Simple KEM+KEM-combiner key exchange protocol KEKEM+KEM applying a 2-KDF for key
derivation to combine two keys KA and KB resulting from an ephemeral resp. static KEM.


We call a KEM source “single-pk” if p = 1 and its auxiliary information “publicly computable” if there is
a function f such that f (i, j, pk i , ci,j ) = αi,j .

    Consider a passive key exchange security game Gpsv-ke   -d , where an adversary interacts with p parties
                                                      KE,p
(whose public keys it is given at the outset of the game) and has access to three oracles: a Run oracle
running the key exchange protocol KE for users of its choice and returning the communication transcript
to the adversary, a Reveal oracle that returns the established session key of such run, and a Test oracle
that returns either the real session key or a random key for a run, depending on the hidden challenge
bit d. (Calling both Reveal and Test is forbidden, being a trivial attack.) The adversary’s task is to
determine d, measured as Advpsv-ke    = Pr Gpsv-ke
                                                   -1  − Pr Gpsv-ke-0 . We provide the formal game in
                                 KE            KE                 KE
Figure 16 in Appendix A.5.
    We show that the security of the KEM+KEM-combiner key exchange in Figure 12 directly reduces to
the security of the used 2-KDF for KEM sources.
Theorem 19 (KEM+KEM-combiner key exchange security). Let Σe be a n × 1 KEM source and Σs
be a p × s KEM source. Let KEKEM+KEM be the key exchange protocol given in Figure 12 using a KDF
2-KDF admitting output length kl and defined wrt. (2, 2)-source collection Σ = (Σe , Σs ) with Σ-map being
the identity function.
    Then, for any adversary A in the passive key exchange security game for KEKEM+KEM , where p is the
number of parties, s the number of protocol runs any single party is involved in, and n = qRun (A) ≤ p · s
is the number of protocol runs overall, there exists an adversary B such that

                                    Advpsv-ke
                                       KEKEM+KEM ,p      2-KDF,Σ,req (B),
                                                    ≤ Advkdf

where the KDF can be of either type (req ∈ {reqX , reqN }). Adversary B makes qNewKey (B) ≤ p + 2 ·
qRun (A), qKDF (B) = qReveal (A), and qRo$-KDF (B) = qTest (A) number of queries and runs in about the
same time as A.
    The following proof shows essentially that the NewKey, KDF, and Ro$-KDF oracles can be used
to simulate the key exchange security oracles Run, Reveal, and Test, respectively.
Proof. In simulating Gpsv-ke-d
                        KEKEM+KEM
                                 , adversary B first initializes an ephemeral-key counter ctr and a static-
                                                                                                       e
key counter ctr u for each party u ∈ [p]. It then calls NewKey for source i = 2 and index j = (u − 1) · s
once for each party u ∈ [p], remembering the returned ciphertext for later and taking the obtained public
key pk u as the public key for party u, which it then gives to A.
   Whenever A calls its Run oracle, B registers two new keys via NewKey: one in each position of
the KDF, from Σe and Σs , respectively. For the first, it simply picks the next index je = ctr e via the
counter ctr e , for the second, it picks the index as js = (u − 1) · s + ctr u , where u ∈ [p] is an index
associated with party B of the key exchange and ctr u a per-party counter. It then increments both ctr e
and ctr u by 1 each. (Note that for the very first query, B already queried that index during initialization
and uses the remembered values from that call.) It uses the first’s context as (pk A , cA ) and the second’s
context ciphertext as cB to form the transcript to be returned to A. For each such Run oracle call, it
records the used source key indexes (je , js ).
   When A makes a Reveal query for some protocol run, B computes the session key by calling its
KDF oracle on inputs ((je , js ), ”key”, kl), where (je , js ) are the source key indexes used for that protocol
run. Likewise, B answers a Test query in the same way, except by using its Ro$-KDF oracle instead.
The queries B makes are permissible wrt. both NOF and XOF requirements (req ∈ {reqN , reqX }), as B
only uses honest source key indexes and does not reuse them between KDF and Ro$-KDF queries, since
A is not allowed to make both a Reveal and Test query to the same protocol run.


                                                           32
   This means means that B simulates Gpsv-ke -d    for A with d = 1 or d = 0 depending on the bit in
                                         KEKEM+KEM
the KDF security game, establishing the claim.


Acknowledgments
We thank Mihir Bellare and Matteo Scarlata for insightful discussions in an early phase of the project,
Matthew Campagna for discussions of ETSI TS 103 744, and the anonymous reviewers for their helpful
comments. This work has been co-funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German
Research Foundation) – SFB 1119 – 236615297 and the German Federal Ministry of Education and
Research (BMBF) under reference 16KISQ074.


References
 [1] Yawning Angel, Benjamin Dowling, Andreas Hülsing, Peter Schwabe, and Fiona Johanna Weber.
     Post quantum noise. In Heng Yin, Angelos Stavrou, Cas Cremers, and Elaine Shi, editors, ACM
     CCS 2022, pages 97–109. ACM Press, November 2022.
 [2] Nimrod Aviram, Benjamin Dowling, Ilan Komargodski, Kenneth G. Paterson, Eyal Ronen, and
     Eylon Yogev. Practical (post-quantum) key combiners from one-wayness and applications to TLS.
     Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2022/065, 2022.
 [3] Matilda Backendal, Mihir Bellare, Felix Günther, and Matteo Scarlata. When messages are keys: Is
     HMAC a dual-PRF? In Helena Handschuh and Anna Lysyanskaya, editors, CRYPTO 2023, Part III,
     volume 14083 of LNCS, pages 661–693. Springer, Cham, August 2023.

 [4] Manuel Barbosa, Deirdre Connolly, João Diogo Duarte, Aaron Kaiser, Peter Schwabe, Karoline
     Varner, and Bas Westerbaan. X-wing. CiC, 1(1):21, 2024.
 [5] Elaine Barker, Lily Chen, and Richard Davis. Recommendation for key-derivation methods in key-
     establishment schemes. NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-56C-r2, National Institute of Standards
     and Technology (NIST), Gaithersburg, MD, August 2020.

 [6] R. Barnes, B. Beurdouche, R. Robert, J. Millican, E. Omara, and K. Cohn-Gordon. The Messaging
     Layer Security (MLS) Protocol. RFC 9420 (Proposed Standard), July 2023.
 [7] R. Barnes, K. Bhargavan, B. Lipp, and C. Wood. Hybrid Public Key Encryption. RFC 9180
     (Informational), February 2022.

 [8] Mihir Bellare, Ran Canetti, and Hugo Krawczyk. Keying hash functions for message authentication.
     In Neal Koblitz, editor, CRYPTO’96, volume 1109 of LNCS, pages 1–15. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,
     August 1996.
 [9] Mihir Bellare and Anna Lysyanskaya. Symmetric and dual PRFs from standard assumptions: A
     generic validation of an HMAC assumption. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2015/1198, 2015.

[10] Mihir Bellare and Phillip Rogaway. The security of triple encryption and a framework for code-based
     game-playing proofs. In Serge Vaudenay, editor, EUROCRYPT 2006, volume 4004 of LNCS, pages
     409–426. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, May / June 2006.
[11] Karthikeyan Bhargavan, Charlie Jacomme, Franziskus Kiefer, and Rolfe Schmidt. Formal verification
     of the PQXDH post-quantum key agreement protocol for end-to-end secure messaging. In Davide
     Balzarotti and Wenyuan Xu, editors, USENIX Security 2024. USENIX Association, August 2024.
[12] Eli Biham. How to decrypt or even substitute des-encrypted messages in 228 steps. Inf. Process.
     Lett., 84(3):117–124, 2002.
[13] Nina Bindel, Jacqueline Brendel, Marc Fischlin, Brian Goncalves, and Douglas Stebila. Hybrid key
     encapsulation mechanisms and authenticated key exchange. In Jintai Ding and Rainer Steinwandt,
     editors, Post-Quantum Cryptography - 10th International Conference, PQCrypto 2019, pages 206–226.
     Springer, Cham, 2019.



                                                  33
[14] Simon Blake-Wilson and Alfred Menezes. Unknown key-share attacks on the station-to-station (STS)
     protocol. In Hideki Imai and Yuliang Zheng, editors, PKC’99, volume 1560 of LNCS, pages 154–170.
     Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, March 1999.
[15] Bluetooth Special Interest Group (SIG). Bluetooth core specification, January 2023. Ver. 5.4.

[16] Jacqueline Brendel, Rune Fiedler, Felix Günther, Christian Janson, and Douglas Stebila. Post-
     quantum asynchronous deniable key exchange and the Signal handshake. In Goichiro Hanaoka, Junji
     Shikata, and Yohei Watanabe, editors, PKC 2022, Part II, volume 13178 of LNCS, pages 3–34.
     Springer, Cham, March 2022.

[17] Jacqueline Brendel, Marc Fischlin, Felix Günther, Christian Janson, and Douglas Stebila. Towards
     post-quantum security for Signal’s X3DH handshake. In Orr Dunkelman, Michael J. Jacobson Jr.,
     and Colin O’Flynn, editors, SAC 2020, volume 12804 of LNCS, pages 404–430. Springer, Cham,
     October 2020.
[18] Chris Brzuska, Eric Cornelissen, and Konrad Kohbrok. Security analysis of the MLS key derivation.
     In 2022 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, pages 2535–2553. IEEE Computer Society Press,
     May 2022.
[19] Chris Brzuska, Antoine Delignat-Lavaud, Christoph Egger, Cédric Fournet, Konrad Kohbrok, and
     Markulf Kohlweiss. Key-schedule security for the TLS 1.3 standard. In Shweta Agrawal and Dongdai
     Lin, editors, ASIACRYPT 2022, Part I, volume 13791 of LNCS, pages 621–650. Springer, Cham,
     December 2022.

[20] Chris Brzuska and Jan Winkelmann.                 NPRFs and their application to
     MLS.             https://datatracker.ietf.org/meeting/interim-2020-cfrg-02/materials/
     slides-interim-2020-cfrg-02-sessa-nprfs-and-their-application-to-mls-00.pdf, July
     2020. Visited on August 26, 2022.

[21] Matthew Campagna and Adam Petcher. Security of hybrid key encapsulation. Cryptology ePrint
     Archive, Report 2020/1364, 2020.
[22] Sofía Celi, Jonathan Hoyland, Douglas Stebila, and Thom Wiggers. A tale of two models: Formal
     verification of KEMTLS via Tamarin. In Vijayalakshmi Atluri, Roberto Di Pietro, Christian Dams-
     gaard Jensen, and Weizhi Meng, editors, ESORICS 2022, Part III, volume 13556 of LNCS, pages
     63–83. Springer, Cham, September 2022.

[23] Lily Chen. Recommendation for key derivation using pseudorandom functions. NIST Special Publi-
     cation (SP) 800-108-r1-upd1, National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), Gaithersburg,
     MD, February 2024.
[24] Tristan Claverie and José Lopes-Esteves. Bluemirror: Reflections on bluetooth pairing and provi-
     sioning protocols. In IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops, SP Workshops 2021, San Francisco,
     CA, USA, May 27, 2021, pages 339–351. IEEE, 2021.
[25] Katriel Cohn-Gordon, Cas Cremers, Benjamin Dowling, Luke Garratt, and Douglas Stebila. A formal
     security analysis of the signal messaging protocol. In 2017 IEEE European Symposium on Security
     and Privacy, EuroS&P 2017, Paris, France, April 26-28, 2017, pages 451–466. IEEE, 2017.

[26] Katriel Cohn-Gordon, Cas Cremers, Kristian Gjøsteen, Håkon Jacobsen, and Tibor Jager. Highly
     efficient key exchange protocols with optimal tightness. In Alexandra Boldyreva and Daniele
     Micciancio, editors, CRYPTO 2019, Part III, volume 11694 of LNCS, pages 767–797. Springer,
     Cham, August 2019.
[27] Hannah Davis, Denis Diemert, Felix Günther, and Tibor Jager. On the concrete security of TLS
     1.3 PSK mode. In Orr Dunkelman and Stefan Dziembowski, editors, EUROCRYPT 2022, Part II,
     volume 13276 of LNCS, pages 876–906. Springer, Cham, May / June 2022.
[28] Hannah Davis and Felix Günther. Tighter proofs for the SIGMA and TLS 1.3 key exchange protocols.
     In Kazue Sako and Nils Ole Tippenhauer, editors, ACNS 21International Conference on Applied
     Cryptography and Network Security, Part II, volume 12727 of LNCS, pages 448–479. Springer, Cham,
     June 2021.


                                                  34
[29] Cyprien Delpech de Saint Guilhem, Marc Fischlin, and Bogdan Warinschi. Authentication in key-
     exchange: Definitions, relations and composition. In Limin Jia and Ralf Küsters, editors, CSF 2020
     Computer Security Foundations Symposium, pages 288–303. IEEE Computer Society Press, 2020.
[30] Denis Diemert and Tibor Jager. On the tight security of TLS 1.3: Theoretically sound cryptographic
     parameters for real-world deployments. Journal of Cryptology, 34(3):30, July 2021.
[31] Samuel Dobson and Steven D. Galbraith. Post-quantum signal key agreement from SIDH. In
     Jung Hee Cheon and Thomas Johansson, editors, Post-Quantum Cryptography - 13th International
     Workshop, PQCrypto 2022, Virtual Event, September 28-30, 2022, Proceedings, volume 13512 of
     Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 422–450. Springer, 2022.

[32] Yevgeniy Dodis, Thomas Ristenpart, John P. Steinberger, and Stefano Tessaro. To hash or not
     to hash again? (In)differentiability results for H 2 and HMAC. In Reihaneh Safavi-Naini and Ran
     Canetti, editors, CRYPTO 2012, volume 7417 of LNCS, pages 348–366. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,
     August 2012.
[33] Benjamin Dowling, Marc Fischlin, Felix Günther, and Douglas Stebila. A cryptographic analysis of
     the TLS 1.3 handshake protocol. Journal of Cryptology, 34(4):37, October 2021.
[34] Benjamin Dowling, Torben Brandt Hansen, and Kenneth G. Paterson. Many a mickle makes a muckle:
     A framework for provably quantum-secure hybrid key exchange. In Jintai Ding and Jean-Pierre
     Tillich, editors, Post-Quantum Cryptography - 11th International Conference, PQCrypto 2020, pages
     483–502. Springer, Cham, 2020.

[35] ETSI. Quantum-safe hybrid key exchanges. Technical Specification TS 103 744 v1.1.1, European
     Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI), December 2020.
[36] ETSI. Quantum-safe hybrid key exchanges. Technical Specification TS 103 744 v1.2.1, European
     Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI), March 2025.

[37] Rune Fiedler and Felix Günther. Security analysis of Signal’s PQXDH handshake. In Tibor Jager,
     Jiaxin Pan, Bor de Kock, and Tjerand Slide, editors, 28th International Conference on Practice and
     Theory of Public-Key Cryptography (PKC 2025). Springer, May 2025. https://eprint.iacr.org/
     2024/702.
[38] German Federal Office for Information Security (BSI). Cryptographic mechanisms: Recommendations
     and key lengths, version: 2025-1. Technical Guideline TR-02102-1, January 2025.
[39] Federico Giacon, Felix Heuer, and Bertram Poettering. KEM combiners. In Michel Abdalla and
     Ricardo Dahab, editors, PKC 2018, Part I, volume 10769 of LNCS, pages 190–218. Springer, Cham,
     March 2018.
[40] Andreas Hülsing, Kai-Chun Ning, Peter Schwabe, Fiona Johanna Weber, and Philip R. Zimmermann.
     Post-quantum WireGuard. In 2021 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, pages 304–321. IEEE
     Computer Society Press, May 2021.
[41] B. Kaliski. PKCS #5: Password-Based Cryptography Specification Version 2.0. RFC 2898 (Informa-
     tional), September 2000. Obsoleted by RFC 8018.

[42] C. Kaufman, P. Hoffman, Y. Nir, and P. Eronen. Internet Key Exchange Protocol Version 2 (IKEv2).
     RFC 5996 (Proposed Standard), September 2010. Obsoleted by RFC 7296, updated by RFCs 5998,
     6989.
[43] Eike Kiltz, Jiaxin Pan, Doreen Riepel, and Magnus Ringerud. Multi-user CDH problems and the
     concrete security of NAXOS and HMQV. In Mike Rosulek, editor, CT-RSA 2023, volume 13871 of
     LNCS, pages 645–671. Springer, Cham, April 2023.
[44] H. Krawczyk, M. Bellare, and R. Canetti. HMAC: Keyed-Hashing for Message Authentication. RFC
     2104 (Informational), February 1997. Updated by RFC 6151.
[45] H. Krawczyk and P. Eronen. HMAC-based Extract-and-Expand Key Derivation Function (HKDF).
     RFC 5869 (Informational), May 2010.



                                                  35
[46] Hugo Krawczyk. SIGMA: The “SIGn-and-MAc” approach to authenticated Diffie-Hellman and its
     use in the IKE protocols. In Dan Boneh, editor, CRYPTO 2003, volume 2729 of LNCS, pages
     400–425. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, August 2003.
[47] Hugo Krawczyk. Cryptographic extraction and key derivation: The HKDF scheme. In Tal Rabin,
     editor, CRYPTO 2010, volume 6223 of LNCS, pages 631–648. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, August
     2010.
[48] Ehren Kret and Rolfe Schmidt. The PQXDH key agreement protocol, January 2024. Revision 3.
[49] Moxie Marlinspike and Trevor Perrin. The X3DH key agreement protocol, April 2016. Revision 1.

[50] Ueli M. Maurer and Stefan Wolf. Diffie-Hellman oracles. In Neal Koblitz, editor, CRYPTO’96,
     volume 1109 of LNCS, pages 268–282. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, August 1996.
[51] Vivek Nair and Dawn Song. Multi-factor key derivation function (MFKDF) for fast, flexible, secure,
     & practical key management. In Joseph A. Calandrino and Carmela Troncoso, editors, USENIX
     Security 2023, pages 2097–2114. USENIX Association, August 2023.

[52] National Institute of Standards and Technology. The keyed-hash message authentication code
     (HMAC). Federal Information Processing Standards Publications (FIPS PUBS) 198-1, U.S. Depart-
     ment of Commerce, Washington, D.C., 2008.
[53] Trevor Perrin. The noise protocol framework, July 2018.

[54] Bertram Poettering and Simon Rastikian. A study of KEM generalizations. In Felix Günther and
     Julia Hesse, editors, Security Standardisation Research - 8th International Conference, SSR 2023,
     Lyon, France, April 22-23, 2023, Proceedings, volume 13895 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
     pages 53–77. Springer, 2023.
[55] Bart Preneel, René Govaerts, and Joos Vandewalle. Hash functions based on block ciphers: A
     synthetic approach. In Douglas R. Stinson, editor, CRYPTO’93, volume 773 of LNCS, pages 368–378.
     Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, August 1994.
[56] E. Rescorla. The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol Version 1.3. RFC 8446 (Proposed
     Standard), August 2018.
[57] Phillip Rogaway. Formalizing human ignorance. In Phong Q. Nguyen, editor, Progressin Cryptology
     - VIETCRYPT 2006, First International Conference on Cryptology in Vietnam, Hanoi, Vietnam,
     September 25-28, 2006, Revised Selected Papers, volume 4341 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
     pages 211–228. Springer, 2006.
[58] Matteo Scarlata, Matilda Backendal, and Miro Haller. MFKDF: Multiple factors knocked down
     flat. In Davide Balzarotti and Wenyuan Xu, editors, USENIX Security 2024. USENIX Association,
     August 2024.
[59] Peter Schwabe, Douglas Stebila, and Thom Wiggers. Post-quantum TLS without handshake
     signatures. In Jay Ligatti, Xinming Ou, Jonathan Katz, and Giovanni Vigna, editors, ACM CCS
     2020, pages 1461–1480. ACM Press, November 2020.
[60] Peter Schwabe, Douglas Stebila, and Thom Wiggers. More efficient post-quantum KEMTLS
     with pre-distributed public keys. In Elisa Bertino, Haya Shulman, and Michael Waidner, editors,
     ESORICS 2021, Part I, volume 12972 of LNCS, pages 3–22. Springer, Cham, October 2021.
[61] JH. Song, R. Poovendran, J. Lee, and T. Iwata. The AES-CMAC Algorithm. RFC 4493 (Informa-
     tional), June 2006.

[62] Douglas Stebila. Security analysis of the iMessage PQ3 protocol. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report
     2024/357, 2024.
[63] Douglas Stebila, Scott Fluhrer, and Shay Gueron. Hybrid key exchange in TLS 1.3 – draft-ietf-tls-
     hybrid-design-10, April 2024.




                                                  36
         Game Gprf -d :                                       Fn(i, y)
               F

         New()                                                    3 If T[i, y] = ⊥ then:
                                                                  4    If d = 1: T[i, y] ← F(xi , y)
          1   ν ←ν+1
                                                                  5    Else: T[i, y] ←$ Z
          2   xν ←$ X
                                                                  6 Return T[i, y]



                   Figure 13: Game defining PRF security for function F : X × Y → Z.

         Game Gvol-prf -d                                     Fn(i, x, ℓ)
               F∗ ,type :

         Finalize(d ∗ )                                          Q ← Q ∪ {(i, x, ℓ)}
                                                                  6
                                                                 If T[i, x, ℓ] = ⊥ then:
                                                                  7
          1 If type = XOF:
                                                               8    If d = 1: T[i, x, ℓ] ← F∗ (ki , x, ℓ)
          2    If (i, x, ℓ), (i, x, ℓ′ ) ∈ Q for ℓ ̸= ℓ′ :
                                                               9    Else: T[i, x, ℓ] ←$ Bℓ
          3       Return 0
                        ∗                                     10 Return T[i, x, ℓ]
          4 Return d

         New()
          5   ν ← ν + 1; kν ←$ {0, 1}κ

Figure 14: Game defining variable-output-length PRF security for function F∗ : {0, 1}κ × X × N → {0, 1}∗
for extendable (type = XOF) resp. non-extendable (type = NOF) outputs.


A     Basic Lemmas and Definitions
A.1    PRF and swap-PRF Security
First, we recap the multi-user PRF and swap-PRF [9] security for a function F : X × Y → Z, where the
swapped function F̄ : Y × X → Z for F is defined as F̄(y, x) = F(x, y).
Definition 20 (PRF and swap-PRF security). Let F : X × Y → Z be a function and let F̄(y, x) = F(x, y).
We define the advantage of an adversary A against the PRF and swap-PRF security of F as
                          prf -1               prf -0
                      h              i      h             i
      Advprf
           F (A) = Pr   G F      (A)   − Pr   GF      (A)   , resp. Advswap-prf
                                                                       F        (A) = Advprf
                                                                                         F̄
                                                                                             (A),

where game Gprf -d is given in Figure 13.
            F


A.2    Variable-Output-Length Pseudorandom Functions and Extendable-Output
       Random Oracles
We follow the idea in [47] to define variable-output-length pseudorandom functions (vol-PRF). These are
functions F∗ : {0, 1}κ × X × N → B∗ that take as input a key from {0, 1}κ , some input x (such as the
label in a KDF), and an output length parameter ℓ ∈ N, and return a pseudorandom string of length ℓ.
The task of the adversary is to distinguish such outputs from random for adaptively chosen inputs (x, ℓ)
when the key is random and secret. Analogously to KDFs, we can define vol-PRFs as XOF or NOF. The
former additionally restricts the adversary from querying both (x, ℓ) and (x, ℓ′ ) for ℓ ̸= ℓ′ .
Definition 21 (vol-PRF security). Let F∗ : {0, 1}κ × X × N → B∗ be a function such that F∗ (k, x, ℓ) ∈ Bℓ
for any k ∈ {0, 1}κ , x ∈ X and ℓ ∈ N. We define the advantage of an adversary A against the vol-prf
security of F∗ for extendable (type = XOF) and non-extendable (type = NOF) outputs as
                                               vol-prf -1         vol-prf -0
                                             h             i    h             i
                        Advvol-prf
                            F∗ ,type (A) = Pr GF∗ ,type (A) − Pr GF∗ ,type (A) ,


where game Gvol-prf -d
            F∗ ,type is given in Figure 14.

   For an extendable-output version of a vol-PRF we penalize the adversary for querying a prefix of
another query. An alternative approach, not punishing the adversary at all, would be to truncate previous
answers (in case a query for a longer length parameter was made before) resp. to fill up the undetermined


                                                             37
                            HXOF (x, ℓ)
                            11 ℓx ← |T[x]| initially empty entry T[x] = ε
                            12 If ℓx < ℓ then
                            13    y ←$ Bℓ−ℓx
                            14    T[x] ← T[x]∥y
                            15 Return T[x][1..ℓ]



                            Figure 15: Extendable-output random oracle HXOF .


bits with random values instead (in case only shorter queries about the same key-input pair have been
made before). This approach is equivalent to the definition stated here via a reduction B, which for each
query (i, x, ℓ) of the adversary A first queries (i, x, ℓmax (A)) for an upper bound ℓmax (A) over all query
lengths of A, and then truncates the response to length ℓ before forwarding it to A. We also note that the
idea of filling up unspecified parts of the output gives rise to a definition of extendable-output random
oracles:
Definition 22 (Extendable-Output Random Oracles). An extendable-output random oracle HXOF :
X × N → {0, 1}∗ is defined in Figure 15.


A.3     Properties of Pseudorandom Sources
Next, we observe that pseudorandom sources, as introduced in Definition 4 are also unpredictable.
Lemma 23 (Pseudorandom sources are unpredictable). Let Σ be a key material source over Skm×Ctx×Aux
for Skm ⊆ {0, 1}m , with sample size u. Let A be an adversary against the predictability of Σ, making at
most qPredict (A) queries to oracle Predict. Then there exists an adversary B, running in approximately
the same time as A, such that
                            Advup
                               Σ (A) ≤ (qPredict (A) + u ) · 2
                                                        2      −m
                                                                  + Advpr
                                                                       Σ (B).

Hence, any (t, ε)-pseudorandom source Σ is (t′ , ε′ )-unpredictable for t′ ≈ t and ε′ = ε + (qPredict (A) +
u2 ) · 2−m ,
Proof of Lemma 23. Adversary B initially receives a vector z of tuples z[i] = (σi , ci , αi ), where σi is either
a genuine sample (if the secret bit d in B’s game is 1) or a truly random string (if d = 0). It checks if
               ̸ j such that σi = σj . If so, it halts and returns 1. Otherwise, adversary B then invokes
there exists i =
adversary A against the unpredictability game in a black-box simulation by handing over win := 0 and all
auxiliary data αi . Whenever A calls oracle Predict on input (i, σ ∗ ), B checks if σ ∗ = σi or not, returns
the answer to A and continues the simulation. When A halts, B halts and outputs 1 if during the course
of the simulation it has encountered a match σ ∗ = σi . Else it returns 0.
    Adversary B clearly runs in about the same time as A, and perfectly simulates the unpredictability
game if d = 1 in its ownh game, up until                                                         h it correctly
                                         collisions. In case of collisions in the source key material,
                              -1 (B) = Pr [ Gup (A) ⇒ 1 ] = Advup (A). Furthermore, Pr Gpr-0 (B) =
                                    i                                                                        i
returns 1. Hence, Pr Gpr    Σ                   Σ                      Σ                               Σ
(qPredict(A) + u2 ) · 2−m . To see this, note that in Gpr-0 , the source key material entries in the vector
                                                            Σ
given to B are sampled independently and uniformly at random from {0, 1}m . Thus, the probability that
adversary A calls oracle Predict on (i, σ ∗ ) such that σ ∗ = σi is at most 2−m for each query, making the
probability of a match during the course of the simulation at most qPredict (A) · 2−m . Furthermore, the
probability of a collision among the random values, causing B to output 1 before starting the simulation, is
at most u2 · 2−m . Subtracting case d = 0 from d = 1 and rearranging gives the bound from the lemma.

A.4     KEM Sources are Pseudorandom
We show that KEM sources are pseudorandom.
Lemma 24 (KEM sources are pseudorandom). Let Σ be a p × s KEM source with sample size u = p · s
and publicly computable auxiliary information for a key encapsulation mechanism KEM with key length m.
Let A be an adversary against the pseudorandomness of Σ. Then there exist adversaries B1 , B2 such that
                           Advpr         ind-cpa                ind-cpa
                              Σ (A) ≤ AdvKEM (B1 ) ≤ p · s · AdvKEM (B2 ),



                                                       38
      Game Gpsv-ke -d :                                                  Reveal(s)
            KE,p

      Initialize()                                                        9 If queried s then: return ⊥
                                                                         10 queried s ← 1    mark sth session queried
      1 d ←$ {0, 1} ; s ← 0
                                                                         11 Return Ks      reveal sth session key Ks
      2 For i = 1 to p do:
      3   (pk i , sk i ) ←$ KE.KGen()                                    Test(s)
             generate parties’ key pairs
                                                                         12 If queried s then: return ⊥
      4 Return (pk 1 , . . . , pk p )
                                                                         13 queried s ← 1 mark sth session queried
      Finalize(d ∗ )                                                     14 If d = 1: K ← Ks
                                                                                               |K |
      5   Return d ∗ = d                                                 15 Else: K ← {0, 1} s
                                                                         16 Return K      real-or-random key
      Run(i, j)
      6 s ← s + 1 increment session counter
      7 (Ks , Ts ) ←$ KE.Run(i, j, pk i , sk i , pk j , sk j ) execute
        the key exchange protocol KE between users i and j,
        resulting in a session key Ks and transcript Ts
      8 Return Ts


Figure 16: Game Gpsv-ke -d defining passive key exchange security for a key exchange protocol KE =
                 KE,p
(KGen, Run).


where B1 is a multi-user, multi-challenge IND-CPA adversary that makes p · s challenge queries to p
users, and B2 is a (classic) single-user, single-challenge IND-CPA adversary.
Proof. The multi-user, multi-challenge reduction B1 creates p users, obtaining their public keys pk i . It then
issues s encapsulation challenge queries against each of them, obtaining real-or-random shared secrets Ki,j
and ciphertexts ci,j . It populates the key material vector z with corresponding entries (Ki,j , (pk i , ci,j ), αi,j ),
using that the auxiliary information is publicly computable, and hands the vector to adversary A. When
A outputs its bit guess, B1 forwards this as its own. Depending on its challenge bit, B1 simulates Gpr              -1
                                                                                                                  Σ
     pr-0
or GΣ , establishing the first part of the bound.
    The second part follows via a standard hybrid argument from multi-user, multi-challenge IND-CPA
security to the classic, single-user, single-challenge version.

A.5       Passive Key Exchange Security
Figure 16 formalizes passive key exchange security for a key exchange protocol KE = (KGen, Run), where
KE.KGen() generates a user key pair (pk, sk) and KE.Run(i, j, pk i , sk i , pk j , sk j ) executes the key exchange
protocols between two users with identity i resp. j taking their key pairs as input.


B      Extendable and Non-extendable Output Functions
In this section, we formalize the definition of an extendable-output function (XOF) and non-extendable
output function (NOF) n-KDF, and show how they are related.
Definition 25 (XOF/NOF KDF). Let F be an n-KDF, let (σ1 , c1 ), . . . , (σn , cn ) be a tuple of secrets and
contexts generated by the sources in the source collection of F and let ℓ1 , ℓ2 ∈ F.KLout. Let

                                       K1 ← F((σ1 , c1 ), . . . , (σn , cn ), L, ℓ1 ) and
                                       K2 ← F((σ1 , c1 ), . . . , (σn , cn ), L, ℓ2 )

If ℓ1 ≤ ℓ2 =⇒ K1 ≼ K2 for all inputs, then we say that F is an extendable-output n-KDF (XOF-n-KDF,
or XOF-KDF for short). If there exists some inputs and lengths ℓ1 ≤ ℓ2 such that K1 is not a prefix of
K2 , then we instead call F a non-extendable output n-KDF (NOF-n-KDF, or simply NOF-KDF).
    Some applications of multi-input KDFs, such as TLS 1.3 [56], bind the input key material to its
intended output length, effectively transforming a XOF-KDF to a NOF-KDF. In the following, we
first discuss how the security of XOF-KDFs relate to that of NOF-KDFs. We then provide a formal


                                                               39
justification of the strategy taken by TLS 1.3, and show that including ℓ in the label turns a XOF-KDF
into a NOF-KDF. Finally, we argue that one can also turn any NOF-KDF into a XOF-KDF if there is a
reasonable upper bound ℓmax on the output length: simply generate the maximal-size output in each call
and truncate to the desired length ℓ.
Relations and transforms. The security that we expect from NOF-n-KDFs is slightly stronger than
for XOF-n-KDFs. For a NOF-n-KDF, we require that the output of the function is always indistinguishable
from random, even given outputs of the KDF on related inputs. For XOF-n-KDFs, this clearly will not
be the case due to the extendable outputs. That is, since we expect XOF-n-KDF outputs to be prefixes
of each other when the inputs only differ in the length field, repeating inputs across challenge queries
in the security game would trivially allow real outputs to be distinguished from random. Hence, we
need to weaken the security notion by imposing more restrictions on the adversary in the XOF version
of game Gkdf   -d
            F,Σ,req in Figure 3. Formally, we control the differing restrictions on the adversary through
the distinct freshness requirements reqNOF and reqXOF for NOF-n-KDF and XOF-n-KDF, respectively.
In reqXOF , we prohibit queries (v, L, ∗) to the Ro$-KDF oracle that only differ in the output-length
compared to previous queries to either the KDF or Ro$-KDF oracle, whereas we in reqNOF only require
that queries do not repeat.
    The following proposition states that any secure NOF-n-KDF is also a secure XOF-n-KDF, whereas
the converse is, in general, not true.
Proposition 26 (NOF-n-KDF-security is strictly stronger than XOF-n-KDF-security).
  1. For any n-KDF F, any source collection Σ, any req, and any adversary A we have
         F,Σ,reqXOF ∧req (A) ≤ AdvF,Σ,reqNOF ∧req (A).
     Advkdf                       kdf


  2. For any XOF-n-KDF XF with ℓ1 < ℓ2 ∈ KLout and any source collection Σ, there exists an adversary
                    XF,Σ,reqN (A) ≥ 1 − 2
     A such that Advkdf                  −ℓ1
                                             .
Proof.
   1. Note that reqXOF =⇒ reqNOF , because if all entries (v, Li , ∗), (v, Lj , ∗) are distinct for i ̸= j
      according to reqXOF , then they are distinct, too, when taking the length values ℓi , ℓj into account as
      required by reqNOF . That is, an adversary that satisfies XOF freshness also satisfies NOF freshness.
      Hence for any n-KDF F, source collection Σ, any requirement req, and any A,

                                        F,Σ,reqXOF ∧req (A) ≤ AdvF,Σ,reqNOF ∧req (A) .
                                     Advkdf                      kdf



   2. Adversary A initializes n keys v = (1, ..., n) via oracle NewKey, one for each input position in the
      n-KDF from their respective source. It then queries oracle Ro$-KDF using the generated keys in
      their respective positions as mapped by Σ-map associated with Σ. It makes the two valid queries
      (v, L, ℓ1 ) and (v, L, ℓ2 ), where ℓ1 < ℓ2 ∈ KLout and L is an arbitrary label in the label space of XF.
      Then, it checks whether the first response is a prefix of the second one, and only outputs 1 if this is
      the case. Thus, adversary A always outputs 1 if oracle Ro$-KDF returns the actual KDF value,
      and with probability at most 2−ℓ1 if both answers are random. Since the queries do not infringe
      predicate reqN , this yields a distinguishing advantage of 1 − 2−ℓ1 .
   Despite the fact that a XOF-n-KDF is in general not secure as a NOF-n-KDF, we observe that any
secure XOF-n-KDF can be turned into a secure NOF-n-KDF by encoding the output length as part of
the label. Formally, we show that there exists a transform XtoN such that for any secure XOF-n-KDF
XF, the resulting XtoN[XF] is a secure NOF-n-KDF. This transform matches, for instance, the strategy
employed by TLS 1.3 [56] where the desired output length of HKDF becomes part of Hkdflabel. More
formally, the label consists of the length value ℓ encoded with two octets, the encoding of the constant
"tls13 " followed by context information. Our result for injective encodings thus confirms that this
provably turns the XOF-n-KDF HKDF into a NOF-n-KDF-version.
Definition 27 (XOF-to-NOF transform XtoN). Let XF be a XOF-n-KDF.                                         Then for all inputs
(σ1 , c1 ), . . . , (σn , cn ), L, ℓ and ℓ ∈ XF.KLout, we let

                XtoN[XF]((σ1 , c1 ), . . . , (σn , cn ), L, ℓ) := XF((σ1 , c1 ), . . . , (σn , cn ), ⟨L, ℓ⟩, ℓ) ,

                                                              ̸ L′ or ℓ =
where ⟨L, ℓ⟩ is an injective encoding which ensures that if L =         ̸ ℓ′ , then ⟨L, ℓ⟩ ̸= ⟨L′ , ℓ′ ⟩. The
resulting n-KDF XtoN[XF] output length set is XF.KLout.


                                                              40
Proposition 28 (XtoN preserves KDF security). Let XF be a XOF-n-KDF and let F := XtoN[XF]. Then
for any source collection Σ and any adversary A against the kdf security of F, there exists an adversary
B such that
                                  F,Σ,reqN ∧req (A) ≤ AdvXF,Σ,reqX ∧req (B) .
                              Advkdf                     kdf


where req can be one of the requirements given in Table 1 or true.
    Adversary B has roughly the same running time as A and makes the same number of queries to each
of the oracles.
Proof. Adversary B runs adversary A, simulating access to the oracles in game Gkdf            F,Σ,reqN ∧req as follows.
For oracles NewKey and SetKey, B simply relays the queries to its own corresponding oracles. If A
issues a query with inputs (v, L, ℓ) to oracle Ro$-KDF or KDF, adversary B queries the corresponding
oracle in its game on input (v, ⟨L, ℓ⟩, ℓ). When adversary A halts and outputs a bit d ∗ , adversary B also
halts and returns d ∗ .
    This way, B perfectly simulates game Gkdf         F,Σ,reqN ∧req for A. Additionally, if the queries issued by A
fulfill requirement reqNOF , then the queries made by adversary B fulfill reqXOF . For this, we observe that
for each query with inputs (v, L, ℓ) by adversary A to oracle Ro$-KDF and each other query to oracle
Ro$-KDF or KDF with inputs (v′ , L′ , ℓ′ ), reqNOF means that (v, L, ℓ) ̸= (v′ , L′ , ℓ′ ), implying that either
v ̸= v′ , L ̸= L′ , or ℓ ̸= ℓ′ . Thanks to the injectivity of the encoding scheme in the XtoN transform, this
implies that (v, ⟨L, ℓ⟩) ̸= (v′ , ⟨L′ , ℓ′ ⟩), which is equivalent to reqXOF .
    Since reqNOF vs. reqXOF is the only difference from reqN to reqX , B satisfies reqX whenever A satisfies
reqN and hence Advkdf      F,Σ,reqN (A) ≤ AdvXF,Σ,reqX (B). For the (optional) additional requirement req, ob-
                                                 kdf

serve that adversary B against Gkdf    F,Σ,reqX ∧req will adhere to req whenever adversary A against GF,Σ,reqN ∧req
                                                                                                           kdf

satisfies it, since none of the optional requirements in Table 1 are concerned with changes to the label
input. In combination with the previous observation that B fulfills reqX , this establishes the claim.
    In the other direction, Proposition 26 guarantees that any secure NOF-n-KDF NF is also secure in
XOF version of the n-KDF game. However, this does not make NF a XOF-n-KDF, since it lacks the
extendable-output functionality. Nonetheless, we note that a NOF-n-KDF NF can be turned into a
XOF-n-KDF XF if there exists a reasonable upper bound ℓmax on the output key length. For example,
HKDF, despite being a XOF-n-KDF, returns keys of at most 255 hash outputs, such that ℓmax = 255 · hl.
The key derivation functions in NIST’s standard SP800-108 [23], all NOF-n-KDFs, put an upper limit
of 232 − 1 of pseudorandom function outputs, but allow applications to enforce smaller upper bounds.
The transformed NtoX[NF] now simply computes NF for length ℓmax and then truncates the result to the
required output length.
Definition 29 (NOF-to-XOF transform). Let NF be a NOF-n-KDF with maximal output length
ℓmax ∈ NF.KLout. Then for all inputs(σ1 , c1 ), . . . , (σn , cn ), L, ℓ where ℓ ∈ NF.KLout, we let

               NtoX[NF]((σ1 , c1 ), . . . , (σn , cn ), L, ℓ) := NF((σ1 , c1 ), . . . , (σn , cn ), L, ℓmax )[1..ℓ].

The resulting n-KDF NtoX[NF] has output length set NF.KLout.
    It is straightforward to see that the transformed function NtoX[NF] adheres to the extendable output
property. For any inputs (v, L, ℓ1 ), (v, L, ℓ2 ) for ℓ1 ≤ ℓ2 the first output is a prefix of the second one
since in both cases the function is evaluated for the same input (v, L, ℓmax ) and truncates the output to
ℓ1 resp. ℓ2 characters.
Proposition 30 (NtoX preserves KDF security). Let NF be a NOF-n-KDF with maximal output length
ℓmax , and let F := NtoX[NF]. Then for any source collection Σ, any requirements req and any adversary
A against the kdf security of F, there exists an adversary B such that

                                       F,Σ,reqX ∧req (A) ≤ AdvNF,Σ,reqN ∧req (B) .
                                    Advkdf                    kdf


where req can be one of the requirements given in Table 1 or true. Adversary B has roughly the same
running time as A and makes at most the same number of queries to each of the oracles.
Proof. Adversary B runs adversary A, simulating access to the oracles named in game Gkdf   F,Σ,reqX via its
own oracles. Adversary B keeps track of A’s queries to oracles Ro$-KDF and KDF in lists Q$ and Qr .
Whenever A makes a query (v, L, ℓ) to oracle Ro$-KDF or KDF, adversary B first checks if (v, L, ∗) has
been recorded in the corresponding list with response K; if so B returns the ℓ-bit prefix of this value K.
Else, B calls its oracle on (v, L, ℓmax ) to get a response K. It stores the query and the answer in the


                                                               41
corresponding list Q$ or Qr and returns the ℓ-bit prefix of K. Adversary B eventually returns A’s output
bit upon termination.
    Observe that B perfectly emulates the NtoX[NF] transform. Furthermore, B only queries its oracles
Ro$-KDF and KDF on values (v, L) for the fixed length parameter ℓmax . Hence, if A adheres to the
requirements reqX , then so does B for requirement reqN . Finally, for the optional requirement req, we
note that adversary B makes at most as many queries to oracle Ro$-KDF—and potentially fewer, since
it does not repeat inputs—and that in each query, the only thing changing from A’s query to that of B is
the length. Since the requirements in Table 1 are not concerned with changes to the length, adversary B
fulfills req whenever adversary A does. The bound now follows.
    We finally note that if the source collection Σ consists solely of pseudorandom sources, then a more
efficient transform exists. The idea, which already appears in many designs like HKDF, is to generate
some fixed-length pseudorandom output via the NOF-n-KDF and to iterate the NOF-n-KDF sufficiently
often to (deterministically) stretch this pseudorandom value to the desired length. Let κ be the length of
the keys in Skm1 ∈ Σ and let ℓ̂ ∈ N be some fixed length. To compute XF((σ1 , c1 ), . . . , (σn , cn ), L, ℓ), first
compute PRK ← F((σ1 , c1 ), . . . , (σn , cn ), L, κ), then iterate ki ← F((PRK, ε), (0, ε) . . . , (0, ε), ⟨L, i⟩, ℓ̂) for
i = 1 to ⌈ℓ/ℓ̂⌉, and then return k1 ∥k2 ∥ . . . truncated to ℓ bits. Note that if one is willing to assume the
existence and availability of a PRF, then the iterated calls to F can be replaced by iterated computations
of the PRF instead.
Specific Transformation for HKDF. Recall that the HKDF expansion function HKDF.Expand com-
putes the output for the pseudorandom key material PRK and the context information c as

                     T (0) = ε
                     T (i) = HMAC(PRK, T (i − 1)||c|| [i]1 )         for i = 1, 2, . . . , N = ⌈ℓ/hl⌉.

where the counter value i is encoded as a single octet. The procedure returns the first ℓ octets of
T (1)∥T (2)∥ . . . ∥T (N ), yielding an extendable output function.
    One option to turn HKDF into a non-extendable output function is to use our general result and
include the length parameter ℓ in the context information c. This route is, for example, taken by TLS 1.3
[56], carefully ensuring that the number of internal hash evaluations for HMAC is still optimal. Another
option, which we suggest here and which is currently not covered by the standard, is to use the empty
label T (0) instead to encode the length parameter (with at most hl characters). That is, define the
expansion step as

                     T (0) = [ℓ]hl
                     T (i) = HMAC(PRK, T (i − 1)||c|| [i]1 )         for i = 1, 2, . . . , N = ⌈ℓ/hl⌉.

Because HKDF requires ℓ ≤ 255 · hl for the fixed-length encoding of the counter value i, encoding the
length value with hl octets in T (0) is feasible for any practical parameter choices. One can also use shorter
encodings of ℓ in T (0) if key derivation only requires shorter outputs. The advantage of this method is
that the users do not need to put the length parameter themselves into the context information.


C      Proof of Proposition 7 (Eliminating the KDF Oracle)
Proof. For this proof we have to distinguish between non-extendable output KDFs and extendable output
KDFs, characterized by the predicates reqNOF or reqXOF , respectively. As discussed in Section 4.2, the
requirements predicate always contains at least one of the two terms in order to obtain a meaningful
definition.
NOF KDFs. We start with the case where reqF = reqN (thus including reqNOF ). Assume w.l.o.g. that
adversary A never repeats the same query to oracle Ro$-KDF or KDF. If it did, it would either receive
the same response (for repeated queries to oracle KDF), or violate the NOF freshness condition reqNOF
(for repeated queries to Ro$-KDF). Hence, we can construct an almost as efficient adversary with the
same or higher advantage which does not repeat queries. Furthermore, assume that A does not make
any “unnecessary” queries to oracle KDF for which it already knows all of the input secrets. This is also
w.l.o.g., as A could compute the response to such queries by itself. Finally, we assume that A adheres to
the requirement req′ := reqN ∧ req, as A would lose the game otherwise. In summary, we assume that all
queries to oracles Ro$-KDF and KDF by A are distinct, contain at least one honest input secret, use all
honest secrets in valid positions, and that there are no dishonest key collisions.


                                                            42
   The proof proceeds via a sequence of games G0 –G2 , where G0 is Gkdf             -1
                                                                               F,Σ,req (that is, the “real” KDF
                                       kdf -0
game). Let G1 be equivalent to GF,Σ,req (the “random” KDF game), except that oracle KDF also
responds to all valid queries with freshly sampled random strings of the required output length. That is,
in G1 , both oracle Ro$-KDF and oracle KDF return random responses. We construct an adversary B1
such that
                                                              F,Σ,req′ ∧reqNoReal (B1 ).
                           Pr [ G0 (A) ] − Pr [ G1 (A) ] ≤ Advkdf                                            (8)
    Adversary B1 runs adversary A, acting as the challenger in game G0 and simulates access to oracles
NewKey, SetKey, and Ro$-KDF by relaying the queries to its own corresponding oracles. To
simulate oracle KDF, adversary B1 forwards the query to oracle Ro$-KDF in its own game. This
gives adversary B1 query count qOr (B1 ) = qOr (A) for Or ∈ {NewKey, SetKey}, and qRo$-KDF (B1 ) =
qRo$-KDF (A) + qKDF (A). When A halts and returns, B1 halts and returns the same output. Depending
on the bit d in the game played by B1 , this simulates either game G0 (if d = 1) or G1 (if d = 0).
    We next show that the reduction adversary B1 satisfies requirement req′ ∧ reqNoReal . Recall that, by
assumption, all queries by A satisfy req′ . Thus, since (except for queries to oracle KDF), adversary
B1 simply forwards all queries by A to its own corresponding oracle, the queries by adversary B1
also satisfy req′ —with the potential exception of the simulated KDF queries. For these queries, note
that if the requirement is symmetric w.r.t. oracles Ro$-KDF and KDF (that is, if it imposes the
same restrictions on queries in Q$ and Qr ), then the switch from querying oracle KDF to instead
querying Ro$-KDF will not violate req′ = reqN ∧ req unless the original query violated reqN ∧ req.
By assumption, req ∈ {req1×Key (S), reqHybridKR (S), reqHybrid (S), true}, which are all symmetric. Thus,
out of the possible requirements, only req1HKey and reqNOF inside of reqN are not symmetric. For
requirement req1HKey , our assumption that adversary A does not make any queries to oracle KDF for
which it knows all the key material means that these queries also do not violate req1HKey when simulated
via oracle Ro$-KDF. Similarly, for requirement reqNOF , our assumption that A does not repeat queries to
oracle KDF also implies that these queries do not violate the NOF freshness requirement when simulated
via oracle Ro$-KDF.8 Thus, by the assumptions on adversary A, adversary B1 satisfies req′ . Finally,
adversary B1 makes no queries to oracle KDF, thereby satisfying reqNoReal .
    Hence Pr[Gkdf   -d
                 F,Σ,req′ ∧reqNoReal (B1 )] = Pr [ G1−d (A) ]. Subtracting case d = 0 from case d = 1 yields
Equation (8).
    Next, let game G2 be identical to G1 , except that oracle KDF once again returns computations of F
rather than random strings. We construct an adversary B2 such that

                                                                  F,Σ,req′ ∧reqNoReal (B2 ).
                               Pr [ G1 (A) ] − Pr [ G2 (A) ] ≤ Advkdf                                                    (9)
Adversary B2 acts like the challenger in game G1 , except to simulate the oracles. For oracles NewKey
and SetKey, B2 forwards the queries to its own corresponding oracles and returns their outputs. When
receiving queries to Ro$-KDF, B2 returns uniformly random strings of appropriate length. To simulate
responses to KDF queries, adversary B2 forwards them to its Ro$-KDF oracle and returns the output.
When A halts and returns d ∗ , B2 also halts and outputs the same bit d ∗ . This gives, qOr (B2 ) = qOr (A)
for Or ∈ {NewKey, SetKey}, and qRo$-KDF (B2 ) = qKDF (A).
    Adversary B2 simulates game G1 or G2 for A depending on the value of the bit d in its own game.
Since it makes no queries to oracle KDF, B2 trivially satisfies reqNoReal . By the same argument as for B1
above, adversary B2 satisfies req′ := reqN ∧ req as long as adversary A satisfies req′ .
    Therefore, we obtain Pr[Gkdf -0                                           kdf -1
                              F,Σ,req′ ∧reqNoReal (B2 )] = Pr[G1 (A)] and Pr[GF,Σ,req′ ∧reqNoReal (B2 )] = Pr[G2 (A)].
Subtracting yields Equation (9).
    We now note that G2 is equivalent to Gkdf            -0
                                                      F,Σ,req′ (the “random” KDF game). Thus, combining
Equation (8) and (9) with standard rewriting of the definition of Advkdf     F,Σ,req′ (A), we obtain


                        F,Σ,req′ (A) ≤ AdvF,Σ,req′ ∧reqNoReal (B1 ) + AdvF,Σ,req′ ∧reqNoReal (B2 ) .
                     Advkdf                                                                                             (10)
                                          kdf                            kdf


Finally, we construct adversary B by running one of B1 and B2 at random, such that

                  F,Σ,req′ ∧reqNoReal (B1 ) + AdvF,Σ,req′ ∧reqNoReal (B2 ) = 2 · AdvF,Σ,req′ ∧reqNoReal (B) ,
               Advkdf                                                                                                   (11)
                                                 kdf                                kdf


with qOr (B) = max(qOr (B1 ), qOr (B2 )) = qOr (A) for oracle Or ∈ {NewKey, SetKey}, qRo$-KDF (B) =
max(qRo$-KDF (B1 ), qRo$-KDF (B2 )) = qRo$-KDF (A) + qKDF (A). Combining Equations (10) and (11) yields
the claim for NOF KDFs.
   8 Note that since both of these assumptions are w.l.o.g., we could equally well have formulated the requirements to be

symmetric. E.g., we could replace reqNOF by (∀q, q ′ ≤ |Q$ ∥Qr |) : q ̸= q ′ =⇒ Q$ [q] ̸= (Q$ ∥Qr )[q ′ ], thereby forbidding
repeated queries to oracle KDF already in the KDF game.


                                                             43
XOF KDFs. Now we look at the second case where reqF = reqX (containing reqXOF ). This case works
similarly to the NOF case, but we have to modify the behavior of the reductions to account for the prefix
property. It is important to observe, that while querying the Ro$-KDF with identical inputs but different
output lengths violates the freshness requirement reqXOF , such queries to the “regular” KDF are, in fact,
admissible. For this case, we assume the existence of some maximum length for queries to Ro$-KDF
and KDF, which we call ℓmax (A). While longer queries are possible in theory, the assumption is that no
adversary will execute such a query. As a result, reductions can simulate answers to the oracle KDF
by modifying the length to be ℓmax (A) and then relaying the query to its own Ro$-KDF oracle. The
response is then stored and truncated to the length that was initially requested. For any future queries to
Ro$-KDF or KDF with the same input but a different length, the reductions do not utilize their own
oracles, but truncate the stored values to the appropriate length.
    We assume again, w.l.o.g., that adversary A never repeats the same query to oracle Ro$-KDF or
KDF A and does not make any “unnecessary” queries to oracle KDF for which it already knows all of
the input secrets. Additionally, assume A does not query Ro$-KDF or KDF with ℓ > ℓmax (A), i.e., we
assume that ℓmax (A) is the maximum length value over all of A’s queries (which is upper bounded by the
maximal admissible key length ℓmax of the KDF, but can be smaller).
    Once again, we use a sequence of games G0 –G2 , where G0 is Gkdf    -1
                                                                     F,Σ,req′ for req := req X ∧ req. Let G1
                                                                                     ′
                    kdf -0
be equivalent to GF,Σ,req′ , except that oracle KDF responds to all valid queries with freshly sampled
random strings of the required output length. That is, in G1 , both oracle Ro$-KDF and oracle KDF
return random responses while also respecting the XOF prefix property. Meaning, the output for queries
of the type (v, L) are randomly sampled once for ℓmax (A), but for all following queries with a different
length value, the outputs are prefixes of each other.
    We construct an adversary B1 such that

                                                              F,Σ,req′ ∧reqNoReal (B1 ),
                           Pr [ G0 (A) ] − Pr [ G1 (A) ] ≤ Advkdf                                         (12)

   Adversary B1 runs adversary A, acting as the challenger in game G0 and simulating access to oracles
NewKey, SetKey, and Ro$-KDF by relaying the queries to its own corresponding oracles. Recall that
repeated queries only differing in length to the Ro$-KDF are disallowed by reqXOF . As such we have to
manually preserve the prefix property for such calls to KDF, as follows.
   To respond to a query (v, L, ℓ) to oracle KDF, B1 first checks if the same query, but with a different
                                         ?
length, has been made before: (v, L, ∗) ∈ Q$ ∪Qr . If this is the case, B1 retrieves the response it previously
received from its own Ro$-KDF oracle and truncates the value to the requested length ℓ. Otherwise, B1
modifies the ℓ input by replacing it with ℓmax (A) and forwards the resulting query (v, L, ℓmax (A)) to its
own Ro$-KDF oracle. It stores the response but returns the ℓ-bit prefix. This procedure ensures that
the freshness property for XOF is achieved while replies consistently exhibit the XOF property.
    Adversary B1 has query count qOr (B1 ) = qOr (A) for oracle Or ∈ {NewKey, SetKey}, and
qRo$-KDF (B1 ) ≤ qRo$-KDF (A) + qKDF (A). When A halts and returns, B1 halts and returns the same
output. Depending on the bit d in the game played by B1 , this simulates either game G0 (if d = 1) or G1
(if d = 0).
     By assumption, all of the queries by A satisfy the requirement req′ . Thus, by an analogous sym-
metry argument to that in the NOF KDF proof above, together with the assumption that A does
not repeat queries or make unnecessary queries to oracle KDF, adversary B1 also satisfies req′ . (In
particular, adversary B1 satisfies the “asymmetric” freshness requirement reqXOF by design, as it only
queries oracle Ro$-KDF once per (v, L, ∗) query by A, also when simulating responses to oracle KDF.)
Furthermore, by design B1 does not query oracle KDF, thus additionally satisfying reqNoReal . This gives
Pr[Gkdf   -d
       F,Σ,req′ ∧reqNoReal (B1 )] = Pr[G1−d (A)]. Subtracting case d = 0 from case d = 1 yields Equation (12).
     Next, we modify G1 such that the KDF oracle always outputs real values, while the Ro$-KDF oracle
still outputs random values, and call the resulting game G2 . Note that G2 is identical to Gkdf       -1
                                                                                                   F,Σ,req′ .
     Now we construct an adversary B2 such that

                                                              F,Σ,req′ ∧reqNoReal (B2 ),
                           Pr [ G1 (A) ] − Pr [ G2 (A) ] ≤ Advkdf                                         (13)

   Adversary B2 acts like the challenger in game G1 , but simulates oracles NewKey and SetKey by
forwarding the queries to its own corresponding oracles. For queries to the Ro$-KDF oracle, it samples
a uniformly random string of length ℓmax (A), stores the resulting string, and returns a truncation to
the requested length. If the same (note that “same” in the context of XOF KDFs means the length
might be different) input has already been queried, B2 retrieves the corresponding random string it
stored earlier and returns the truncated version. To simulate responses to KDF queries, adversary


                                                        44
B2 forwards requests to its Ro$-KDF. Eventually, A terminates and outputs a bit b, at which point
adversary B2 does the same. This gives, qOr (B2 ) = qOr (A) for Or ∈ {NewKey, SetKey}, and we also
get qRo$-KDF (B2 ) ≤ qKDF (A).
    B2 now simulates either G1 or G2 depending on the value d in its own game. By modifying the output
length of queries by A to Ro$-KDF and KDF, outputs of B2 also exhibit the prefix property, which we
expect of its answers. Lastly, by the same argument as above, B2 satisfies req′ ∧ reqNoReal given that the
queries by A satisfy req′ .
    Combining Equation (12) and (13) with standard rewriting of the definition of Advkdf    F,Σ,req′ (A), we
obtain

                      F,Σ,req′ (A) ≤ AdvF,Σ,req′ ∧reqNoReal (B1 ) + AdvF,Σ,req′ ∧reqNoReal (B2 ) .
                   Advkdf                                                                                      (14)
                                        kdf                            kdf


Finally, we construct adversary B from B1 and B2 (by running one of them at random) such that

                 F,Σ,req′ ∧reqNoReal (B1 ) + AdvF,Σ,req′ ∧reqNoReal (B2 ) = 2 · AdvF,Σ,req′ ∧reqNoReal (B) ,
              Advkdf                                                                                           (15)
                                                kdf                                kdf


with, qOr (B) = max(qOr (B1 ), qOr (B2 )) = qOr (A) for oracle Or ∈ {NewKey, SetKey}, as well as
qRo$-KDF (B), = max(qRo$-KDF (B1 ), and qRo$-KDF (B2 )) ≤ qRo$-KDF (A) + qKDF (A). Combining Equa-
tions (10) and (11) yields the same bound as we have achieved in the case for NOF KDFs. Thus, in both
cases we achieve the bound claimed in Proposition 7.


D      Deferred Details of Constructions
D.1     Signal X3DH
Lemma 31 (ΣG,p,s,t                               G,p,s,t
                 X3DH is unpredictable). Let ΣX3DH be the DH source underlying X3DH for group G
with sample size u = p t + p s + p st + ps for p parties with s sessions and t semi-static keys each, as
                       2      2     2       2

described above. Let A1 , A2 be adversaries against the multi-challenge unpredictability of ΣG,p,s,t
                                                                                             X3DH , with A1
making only a single query to Predict. Then there exist adversaries B1 , B2 against the computational
Diffie–Hellman and gap Diffie–Hellman problem in G, respectively, such that
                                                     2                                                  2
               Advup
                  Σ (A1 ) ≤ AdvG (B1 ) + |G|
                               cdh        u
                                                         and    Advup           gapdh
                                                                   Σ (A2 ) ≤ AdvG     (B2 ) + |G|
                                                                                               u
                                                                                                  ,

The adversaries B1 , B2 have running time roughly the same as A1 , A2 , respectively, plus O(u), and
qDDH (B2 ) = qPredict (A2 ).

Proof. We leverage the random self-reducibility of CDH and GapDH [50].
     For the first case, given the CDH challenge g x , g y , algorithm B1 sets the DH shares making up the
source key material of z[i] at position i as (g x )ri , (g y )si , where it samples and stores ri , si ←$ Zq , and
outputs these shares as the auxiliary information to A1 . (If any randomizer values collide (i.e., ri si = rj sj
for i ̸= j), we have B1 immediately abort; by the birthday bound, this happens with probability at most
 u2                                                                            ∗ ri−1 s−1
|G| .) Upon A1 ’s (single) Predict(i, σ ) query, algorithm B outputs (σ )                 as its CDH solution. If
                                        ∗                                              i

                                             −1 −1                −1 −1
A1 ’s prediction was correct, then (σ ∗ )ri si = (g xri ysi )ri si = g xy , and B1 succeeds.
    For the second case, algorithm B2 likewise re-randomizes the GapDH challenge g x , g y to form the key
material vector z (and aborts upon collisions). Upon a Predict(i, σ ∗ ) query by A2 , B2 calls its DDH
                                                                                  −1 −1
on the triple ((g x )ri , (g y )si , σ ∗ ). If the answer is 1, B2 outputs (σ ∗ )ri si as its solution, otherwise it
returns win = 0 to A2 . If any of A1 ’s predictions are correct, then B2 succeeds.


E     Collision Resistance
We argue here that collision resistance is a desirable security feature of key derivation functions and, thus,
of combiners. This property says that it is infeasible to find distinct inputs for the key derivation function
resulting in the same key. Note that this property does not follow from the pseudorandomness of the key
derivation function. The latter property only ensures random-looking outputs if the key material input
has sufficient entropy. In the collision-resistant setting, however, there may be no entropy in the inputs.
Collision resistance of HKDF.Expand is, for example, explicitly stated as a requirement in the TLS 1.3
standard [56]: “In some of the uses of HKDF in this document (e.g., for generating exporters and the
resumption_master_secret), it is necessary that the application of HKDF-Expand be collision resistant”.


                                                           45
               A                           E                       E                           B
         (authenticates)                                     (authenticates)
                           −−−−−−−→                                            −−−−−−−→
                           ←−−−−−−−                                            ←−−−−−−−
                           −−−−−−−→                                            −−−−−−−→
                           ←−−−−−−−                                            ←−−−−−−−
           secretA,E       transc A,E   secretA,E             secretE,B        transc E,B   secretE,B

            K ← KDF(secretA,E , transc A,E )                    K ← KDF(secretE,B , transc E,B )


Figure 17: Unknown key share attack of adversary E on key exchange protocol: B assumes to share the
key K with E but instead shares it with A.


E.1     Collision Resistance as a Useful Feature
We give an example of why collision resistance is a useful property for key derivation functions. We
discuss this for the case of a plain key derivation function but the idea applies equally to combiners.
Our example is based on implicitly authenticated key exchange protocols and unknown key share (UKS)
attacks [14] (also known as identity-misbinding attacks [46]). In a UKS attack the adversary E aims to
make a party B believe that it shares a derived key with E while it actually shares the key with another
honest party A. A formalization of security against such attacks can be found in [29]: If a session of an
honest party B accepts and the intended (possibly malicious) partner E has authenticated, then there
cannot be any other session for a different honest party A which holds the same session key as B.
    The attack is depicted in Figure 17. We assume that in each execution between two parties, only
the left party authenticates (unilateral authentication). The adversary E engages in an execution with
party A, resulting in an intermediate secret secretA,E , like a Diffie-Hellman share, and a communication
transcript transc A,E . We assume that the key derivation function KDF now applies secretA,E with input
transc A,E to derive the session key. The same happens (concurrently, intertwined, or afterwards) on the
right-hand side in an execution between E and party B, yielding a derived key KDF(secretE,B , transc E,B ).
The goal of the attacker E is to ensure that both executions end up with the same session key K.
    Observe that E actively participates in both executions and may thus influence the inputs to the
key derivation function, potentially being able to force colliding session keys despite different transcripts
transc A,E and transc E,B on both sides. If we now conservatively assume that the key derivation function is
collision resistant then E’s attack strategy is invalidated: It is reasonable to assume that the authenticating
party transmits some identifying information like a certified public key with a unique serial number. Then
the two transcripts must be distinct, and collision resistance of the key derivation function ensures that
the session keys cannot match. Let us finally remark that key exchange protocols may still withstand
UKS attacks even if the key derivation is not collision resistant. But then this must be ensured by the
protocol itself and does not follow immediately from the security of the KDF.

E.2     Definition
We define collision resistance in a straightforward way, bounding the probability of an adversary A
outputting two distinct lists of values

                         (σ1 , c1 ), . . . , (σn , cn ), L, ℓ ̸= (σ1′ , c1′ ), . . . , (σn′ , cn′ ), L′ , ℓ′
                                                                                                            

which the n-KDF F maps to the same key output. Collision resistance applies to both NOF-n-KDF and
XOF-n-KDF key derivation functions. Since there always exists an adversary outputting such collisions,
we follow the human-ignorance approach [57] and bound the probability of a specific adversary finding
such a collision. However, for a reasonable notion, one usually requires that the set KLout of admissible
output lengths ℓ enforces a non-trivial lower bound.
Definition 32 (KDF Collision Resistance). Let F be an n-KDF. We define the advantage of an
adversary A against the collision resistance of F as

                                            F (A) = Pr [ GF (A) ] .
                                         Advcr            cr




                                                      46
                             Game Gcr
                                   F :

                             Finalize((σi , ci )i=1..n , L, ℓ, (σi′ , ci′ )i=1..n , L′ , ℓ′ )
                              1   Return F((σi , ci )i=1..n , L, ℓ) = F((σi′ , ci′ )i=1..n , L′ , ℓ′ )
                                       ∧ ((σi , ci )i=1..n , L, ℓ) ̸= ((σi′ , ci′ )i=1..n , L′ , ℓ′ )


                     Figure 18: Game defining collision-resistance of an n-input KDF F.


E.3     Examples
We consider here the previously investigated examples in light of collision resistance. One may suspect
that HKDF-based constructions inherit collision resistance from the underlying hash function, and this
is indeed true if one restricts S inputs to fixed lengths (see also [32]). Blockcipher-based constructions
like the ones based on CMAC are, in general, not collision-resistant, as we explain for the case of the key
derivation function in Bluetooth Low Energy. As for our new constructions, the information-theoretical
one is provably not collision resistant. For the blockcipher-based construction, the question remains open.
HKDF. Recall from the analysis of the proposed ETSI-CatKDF in Section 5.3 that HMAC and thus HKDF
is not collision resistant. Any short or long salt value S in the extraction step HKDF.Extract(S, σ, ) =
HMAC(S, σ) is either padded with 0-bytes or hashed first:
                                           (
                                             S∥(0x00)B−|S|      if |S| ≤ B
                               PoH(S) :=
                                             H(S)∥(0x00) B−hl
                                                                otherwise.

Collisions like S and S ′ = S∥0x00 for short values S with |S| < B, and S and S ′ = H(S) for values S with
|S| > B can easily be constructed. This means that one needs to put further restrictions on inputs used
as the key in HMAC, for example, only allowing fixed-length inputs or always hashing the data first.
    For HKDF, the HMAC properties directly translate into HKDF being collision resistant if and only
if salts are either fixed-length or strictly longer than block-length B bits. To see this, observe that
HKDF.Extract(S, σ) = HMAC(S, σ) maps inputs S and σ to a unique pseudorandom key PRK (unless a
collision occurs in HMAC). This pseudorandom key is then used in HKDF.Expand(PRK, c, ℓ), iterating
T (i) = HMAC(PRK, T (i − 1)||c||i) for T (0) = ε and counter i = 1, 2, . . . represented as a fixed-length
octet. Once more, unless one finds a collision in the underlying hash function, all outputs T (i) are unique
if PRK and c are different. In summary, any collision (σ, S, c) ̸= (σ ′ , S ′ , c ′ ) for “feasible” salts S, S ′ yields
a collision for the underlying hash function H in HMAC. This holds also for varying length parameters
ℓ, since for identical (σ, S, c) = (σ ′ , S ′ , c ′ ) but different length inputs ℓ ̸= ℓ′ HKDF produces outputs of
different length, which cannot collide.
MLS PSK combiner. The MLS n-KDF for PSK combination from Figure 5 is collision resistant if the
hash function H underlying HMAC is. For distinct values psk i , the extracted values psk_extracted i must
be distinct (since HMAC is applied in a collision-resistant way). Hence for distinct values (psk i , ci , L) ̸=
(psk ′i , ci′ , L′ ), we also have that the derived values differ, psk_inputi ̸= psk_input′i (except for an HMAC
collision and thus a H collision). Finally, distinct psk_inputi values being folded into the final psk_secretn
output also do not collide, except if an HMAC collision occurs.
ETSI-CatKDF. Let us now look into ETSI-CatKDF, which computes the key as HKDF(secret, L, fcontext , ℓ).
Note that fcontext = f (c, MA, MB) encodes the input tuple (c, MA, MB) injectively. In contrast, the
source key material secret = psk||k1 || . . . ||kn simply concatenates the provided sub keys, with psk being
potentially the empty string. The standard does not specify that the number of sub-keys is fixed, nor that
the length of the keys is. We thus state this explicitly as a requirement to achieve collision resistance:
   1. Labels L in ETSI-CatKDF shall be of fixed length.
   2. The number n of sub keys ki and their individual lengths must be fixed.

Under these stipulations, all inputs to HKDF are unique. It follows that protocol ETSI-CatKDF is
collision-resistant due to the collision resistance of HKDF.
Signal X3DH. Signal’s key derivation function is generally not collision resistant since the context
information does not enter the key derivation. If we assume that all context values ci are always empty,
then Signal inherits collision-resistance from HKDF. It merely inserts the concatenated key material


                                                                  47
values and constants, especially the all-zero salt, into the computations such that collision resistance of
the underlying hash function ensures that distinct inputs are mapped to distinct outputs.
Blockcipher-based key derivation in Bluetooth Low Energy. The Bluetooth Low Energy
[15] key derivation function, denoted as f 5, takes as input the 256-bit x-coordinate W of an elliptic-curve
Diffie-Hellman share, computed jointly by the two parties during Secure Simple Pairing, and first computes

                                                       T = CMAC(S, W )

for the constant 128-bit salt S = 0x6C888391 AAF5A538 60370BDB 5A6083BE. Here, CMAC is the AES-
CMAC algorithm according to RFC 4493 [61]. The algorithm computes a CBC-MAC for the all-zero
initialization vector IV = 0128 , where the last message block is first xored with sub key K1 if it is full
block length resp. padded with 10j and xored with sub key K2 if it is not aligned to block length. The
sub-keys are derived from the AES key K (the details are irrelevant to us here). More concretely, let
M = M1 ||M2 || . . . ||Mn with Mi ∈ {0, 1}128 for i = 1, 2, . . . , n−1 and Mn ∈ {0, 1}≤128 . Set Mn′ = K1 ⊕Mn
if |Mn | = 128 and Mn′ = K2 ⊕ Mn ||10|Mn |−1 if |Mn | < 128. Then

                         CMAC(K, M ) = AES(K, Mn′ ⊕ yn−1 )
                         where y0 = 0128 , yi = AES(K, Mi ⊕ yi−1 ) for i = 1, 2, . . . , n − 1.

In the second step, one computes two keys, one for message authentication during the Secure Simple
Pairing, and one as the session key. Here we only consider the derivation of the session key (with prefix
0x01 instead of 0x00 for the MAC key):

                                k = CMAC(T, 0x01||keyID||N1 ||N2 ||A1 ||A2 ||0x0100)

where keyID = 0x62746C65 is the 32-bit ASCII representation of the string ’btle’, N1 , N2 are the 128-bit
nonces exchanged in the Secure Simple Pairing, and A1 , A2 are the 56-bit encodings of the Bluetooth ad-
dresses of the involved parties. Hence, the overall input length equals 424 bits, yielding four AES evaluations
for inputs M1 = 0x01||keyID||N1 [1..88], M2 = N1 [89..128]||N2 [1..88], M3 = N2 [89..128]||A1 ||A2 [1..32]
and M4 = A2 [33..56]||0x0100||1087 .
    The Bluetooth Low Energy key derivation is not collision-resistant due to the deployment of the
block cipher. We can use the idea of the BlueMirror reflection attack on Bluetooth [24]—which considers
mirroring the data sent by an honest user and thus does not touch collision-resistance immediately. An
adversary can first pick regular data W, N1 , N2 , A1 , A2 and then computes T (with sub-keys T1 , T2 ) and
the session key k according to the scheme. In particular, the result of the first block in the computation
equals y1 = AES(T, 0x01||keyID||N1 [1..88]). Let y2 , y3 , y4 denote the other intermediate blocks. Then
the adversary picks a fresh W ∗ ̸= W , and computes T ∗ with sub-keys T1∗ , T2∗ . It now computes
y1∗ = AES(T ∗ , M1 ) and then “backwards” y3∗ = AES−1 (T ∗ , y4 ) ⊕ T2 ∗ ⊕M4 , y2∗ = AES−1 (T ∗ , y3∗ ) ⊕ M3 , and
M2∗ = AES−1 (T ∗ , y2∗ )⊕y1∗ . The adversary sets N1∗ [89..128]||N2∗ [1..88] = M2∗ , and otherwise N1∗ , N2∗ , A∗1 , A∗2
coincide with the values N1 , N2 , A1 , A2 . In particular, the adversary only needs to adapt the input block
M2∗ , but the other input blocks M1 , M3 , M4 remain identical. If one now computes the values in
forward direction for T ∗ then y1∗ = AES(T ∗ , M1 ), y2∗ = AES(T ∗ , M2∗ ⊕ y1∗ ), y3∗ = AES(T ∗ , M3 ⊕ y2∗ ) and
y4∗ = AES(T ∗ , M4 ⊕ y3∗ ⊕ T2∗ ) = y4 . Hence, the adversary is always able to find a collision.
Our blockcipher-based construction. Recall that we apply the blockcipher BC first via

                                              k ← BC(σ1 , BC(σ2 , BC(σ1 , 0bl ))

to compute a key, and then call the vol-PRF Expand for inputs k and (c1 , c2 ), L and ℓ. Even if we assume
collision resistance of the function Expand, then this implies that the only chance to find an input collision
is to make two distinct key pairs (σ1 , σ2 ), (σ1′ , σ2′ ) collide to yield the same value k. We are not aware if
this task is feasible for the chain evaluations of the blockcipher, and leave this as an open question.
Our Information-theoretically secure construction. The information-theoretically secure con-
struction is certainly not collision resistant. Given arbitrary inputs (σ1 , c1 ), . . . , (σn , cn ), L, ℓ and (σ1′ , c1′ ), . . . ,
                                                                                    ′
(σn′ , cn′ ), L′ , ℓ′ with ℓ = ℓ′ , one can set the information-theoretic part σnits in σn′ to
                                        ′
                                    σnits ← σnits ⊕ F((σ1 , c1 ), . . . , (σnkdf , cn ), L, ℓ)
                                                                                      ′
                                                    ⊕ F((σ1′ , c1′ ), . . . , (σnkdf , cn′ , ), L′ , ℓ′ )

such that the outputs of both evaluations collide.


                                                                   48
