The Best of Both Worlds: Hybrid Authenticated
 Key Exchange for QKD(N) without Signatures

                  Sebastian Clermont1       and Johanna Henrich2
              1
               Technical University of Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany
          2
            Darmstadt University of Applied Sciences, Darmstadt, Germany
         sebastian.clermont@tu-darmstadt.de, johanna.henrich@h-da.de



        Abstract. Post-Quantum Cryptography (PQC) and Quantum Key Dis-
        tribution (QKD) are both contenders for securing communication against
        quantum adversaries, but are at different stages of maturity. For hedg-
        ing security risks, hybridization is the default approach. Unlike previous
        research on classical–post-quantum hybrids, we propose a QKD-PQC
        hybrid for Authenticated Key Exchange (AKE).
        To minimize the attack surface, we completely remove the requirement
        for digital signature schemes and propose a Hybrid Authenticated Key
        Exchange (HAKE) that combines Post-Quantum (PQ) AKE and QKD
        key agreement, leveraging Key Encapsulation Mechanisms (KEMs) for
        both key exchange and authentication. Our fully modular security anal-
        ysis, based on the recent multi-input Key Derivation Function (KDF)
        framework by Backendal et al. (Eurocrypt 2025), establishes AKE se-
        curity in the CK01 model and yields a conditional information-theoretic
        security guarantee when the QKD component is uncompromised; a prop-
        erty not achieved by prior hybrid protocols. We demonstrate the proto-
        col’s practical feasibility with benchmarks using ML-KEM, FrodoKEM,
        and Classic McEliece.


Keywords: Hybrid Authenticated Key Exchange · Key Combiner · Quantum
Key Distribution · Post-Quantum Cryptography · Key Encapsulation Mecha-
nism · Provable Security · Benchmark


1     Introduction
Public-key cryptography encompasses mechanisms such as key exchange and
digital signatures that enable secure communication. One such application is
⋆
    This work was funded by the German Federal Ministry of Research, Technology
    and Space and the Hessian Ministry of Higher Education, Research, Science and the
    Arts within their joint support of the National Research Center for Applied Cyber-
    security ATHENE. We would like to thank Fabian Seidl, former research associate
    and founder of qonduit, for his valuable support in implementing the benchmark-
    ing framework and for his technical guidance throughout this aspect of the work.
    Further, we gratefully acknowledge Robin Böhm and Oleg Nikiforov from Deutsche
    Telekom for valuable discussions on the QKDN integration.
2      S. Clermont and J. Henrich

Authenticated Key Exchange (AKE), where two parties securely negotiate a
shared secret. Such protocols often use two distinct public-key schemes for key
establishment and entity authentication, with KEMs and digital signatures being
the most common combination.
    However, sufficiently powerful quantum computers (QCs), which may become
available within the next few years [18], are capable of breaking classical asym-
metric algorithms such as Elliptic-curve Diffie–Hellman (ECDH) and RSA in
polynomial time [42]. Moreover, harvest-then-decrypt attacks [40] pose a threat
to today’s encrypted communication, thereby enabling the recording of data for
later decryption.
    Besides PQC [44], which is based on mathematical problems, QKD uses quan-
tum effects to establish pairwise shared secrets in an information-theoretically
secure way [33]. Due to the quantum phenomena used for key establishment, tra-
ditional attacks such as the aforementioned harvest-then-decrypt attacks are not
applicable to QKD. Furthermore, QKD is the only current technology that en-
ables the exchange of truly random keys and thus supports information-theoretic
secure (ITS) communication. In addition to these advantages, QKD faces sev-
eral challenges that must be overcome before it is ready for widespread adoption.
Currently, there are no reliable, market-ready QKD modules that can bridge dis-
tances of more than 150 km [33]. Moreover, it is only possible to implement point-
to-point connections and star topologies without additional measures. That is
why QKD modules are often concatenated into QKD Network (QKDN) to dis-
tribute a key using hop-by-hop forwarding. This topology makes such a network
vulnerable to insider attacks by compromised nodes. In addition, security vul-
nerabilities during implementation, such as insufficient authentication measures
or side-channel leaks, must be given due consideration [18].
    Hybridization can hedge security risks by combining the security guaran-
tees of different schemes, ensuring that the security objectives are met as long
as at least one of the schemes used has not been compromised [22]. Therefore,
a HAKE based on both PQC and QKD can establish a secure channel that
withstands an attacker, provided that at least one of these technologies remains
secure. This approach aligns with the recommendations [20] of various European
security organizations, including Federal Office for Information Security (BSI),
French Cybersecurity Agency (ANSSI), and Netherlands National Communi-
cations Security Agency (NLNCSA). They conclude that QKD alone currently
poses various risks from both theoretical and practical perspectives and should
be used only as a supplementary security component.


1.1   Related Work

Entity authentication without signatures, e.g., via KEM-based authentication,
is explored in several papers. Schwabe et al. describe a variant of TLS 1.3 that
replaces the handshake’s signature procedures with KEM-based authentication
[41]. In addition, other AKE protocols with KEM-based authentication are dis-
cussed in the literature [25,21].
                                    HAKE for QKD(N) without Signatures          3

    Boyd et al. provide modular building blocks to generate different AKE pro-
tocols that are suitable for instantiation with PQC [8]. In essence, this process
provides various authentication options, both with and without signatures. The
constructions are generic, allowing for instantiation with suitable primitives.
    With respect to HAKE, Bindel et al. describe the general modeling of a
HAKE using KEMs [7]. Dowling et al. describe the HAKE protocol Muckle
[16], which combines classical schemes with PQC, QKD, and symmetric Pre-
Shared Key (PSK). Authentication is done using a PSK, which is unfeasible
for general deployments because preshared secrets must be established out of
band and be available for each distinct pair of communicating parties. Bruckner
et al. extend Muckle and call the result the Muckle+ protocol [9]. Muckle+
allows for PQC+QKD hybrid AKE using digital signatures. Using a Public Key
Infrastructure (PKI) enables a hierarchical trust model, as is common practice.
In a supplementary extension, Muckle# is also described, which provides KEM-
based authentication [3]. However, as in Muckle+, it is assumed that QKD keys
are synchronized internally and can be retrieved without specifying an identifier,
whereas the industry standard [38] requires key retrieval via explicit key IDs.
Moreover, Muckle# does not employ a formally analyzed key combiner and
does not achieve the conditional information-theoretic security guarantee that
our construction provides (cf. Theorem 2).
    Ricci et al. describe a HAKE combining classical and PQC schemes with
QKD using KEM-based authentication [39], but focus on benchmarking rather
than formal security analysis of the key combiner.
    Hövelmanns et al. propose a QKD + PQC hybrid protocol proven secure
in a variant of the CK+ model [28] with modifications to accommodate QKD
[24]. They identify misunderstandings on using key combiners in other designs
but use an XOR-based combiner that introduces a dependent-key vulnerability,
fixable by using a combiner that binds context information to the final key [1].

1.2   Our Contributions
We employ a combination of QKD and PQC to design a HAKE that operates
entirely without digital signature schemes or symmetric PSKs during proto-
col execution, thereby reducing system complexity and overall attack surface.
This choice eliminates the need to deploy a separate signature-key infrastruc-
ture and avoids the substantial communication and computational overhead of
post-quantum digital signatures, which can inflate handshake sizes by several
kilobytes per operation. Our construction integrates the KEM-based AKE of
Boyd et al. [8] with a QKD key agreement and applies the multi-input KDF
framework of Backendal et al. [1] to obtain security guarantees that neither
component achieves alone. Its security is established in the well-known CK01
model [10], which we choose for compatibility with the underlying KEM-based
AKE and because it already captures forward secrecy. More recent models such
as eCK provide additional guarantees around ephemeral key leakage, but these
are less relevant in the KEM-based setting where ephemeral secrets are not long-
lived Diffie–Hellman exponents.
4       S. Clermont and J. Henrich

    This yields a fully modular security analysis: the two component protocols
are treated in isolation, and hybrid security follows from the combiner. If ei-
ther component is replaced or improved, only the corresponding bound needs
updating, without re-proving the entire protocol.
    Crucially, this modular analysis yields a conditional information-theoretic
security guarantee (Theorem 2): when the QKD system is uncompromised, the
resulting session key is information-theoretically secure, even if all computa-
tional assumptions are broken. This property strictly exceeds what prior PQC–
QKD hybrid protocols achieve. Prior constructions derive the combined key via
hash-based key derivation, which yields computational rather than information-
theoretic security even when one component provides unconditionally secure
keys. This provides a graceful degradation guarantee: when QKD is secure, the
resulting session key is information-theoretically secure; should QKD fail, the
session key retains its full computational security under standard assumptions.
    Finally, we have implemented the protocol with various KEMs and provide
benchmarks on the real-world performance.


2     Preliminaries

2.1   Notation

This paper uses established notation for cryptographic papers. λ denotes the
security parameter. a ← b denotes deterministic assignment of the value b to
variables a or assigning the output of the deterministic algorithm b to a. c ←$ d
denotes assigning the output of the probabilistic algorithm d to the variable
c. JexprK denotes the boolean evaluation of the expression expr. = denotes an
equality check. The symbol ⊥ indicates failure, := denotes a definition. ∥ denotes
the concatenation of values, Pr[event] the probability of some event and |value|
the absolute value. All PPTand QPT adversaries are efficient adversaries, which
means their runtime and memory are upper-bounded by some polynomial that
is dependent on λ. For the advantage of adversaries, we write Advproperty
                                                                       scheme,A (λ) for
the advantage of an adversary A against the security property property of some
cryptographic scheme scheme. Expproperty
                                    scheme,A (λ) is used to define the corresponding
experiment. Defining security of KDFs requires additional parameters; these
advantage terms are introduced in Section 2.4.
    For oracle definitions, we write “ODecaps (sk, ·) on input c” for an oracle called
Decaps. The oracle takes a single input, as indicated by the single ” · ”, and we
will call this input ”c” in the algorithmic description of the oracle. We make sk
explicit in the oracle description to highlight which secrets an adversary is given
indirect access to.


2.2   Key Encapsulation Mechanisms

A KEM is an asymmetric primitive that can be used to establish a shared secret
between two parties [13]. It consists of three algorithms.
                                    HAKE for QKD(N) without Signatures                5

(pk, sk) ←$ KGen(1λ ): The probabilistic algorithm that, given the security pa-
     rameter λ, generates a key pair (pk, sk).
(ct, k) ←$ Encaps(pk): Encaps is a probabilistic algorithm, taking the pk to com-
     pute a ciphertext ct encapsulating a shared secret and the shared secret k
     itself.
k ← Decaps(sk, ct): Decaps is a deterministic algorithm, using sk and ct to obtain
     the corresponding k.

    We call a KEM ε-correct, iff for all (sk, pk) ←$ KGen(1λ ) it holds that if
(ct, k) ←$ Encaps(pk) and k′ ← Decaps(sk, ct), then k′ = k except with negligible
probability.


ExpIND-CPA
   KEM,A (λ):                ExpIND-CCA
                                KEM,A (λ):                    ODecaps (sk, ·) on input c:
 1 (pk, sk) ←$ KGen(1λ )      7 (pk, sk) ←$ KGen(1λ )         13 if Jc = c∗ K
 2 k0 ←$ K                    8 k0 ←$ K                       14    return ⊥
      ∗                            ∗
 3 (c , k1 ) ←$ Encaps(pk)    9 (c , k1 ) ←$ Encaps(pk)       15

 4 b ←$ {0, 1}               10 b ←$ {0, 1}                        return Decaps(sk, c)
    ′            ∗               ′        O         ∗
 5 b ←$ A(pk, c , kb )       11 b ←$ A Decaps (pk, c , kb )
              ′                             ′
 6 return Jb = bK            12 return Jb = bK

Fig. 1. Game definition for IND-ATK security of key encapsulation mechanisms with
ATK ∈ {CPA, CCA}.




Definition 1 (IND-ATK security of KEM schemes). Given the security
game in Figure 1, we define the advantage of an adversary against IND-ATK
security of a key encapsulation scheme KEM for ATK ∈ {CPA, CCA}, as
                                  h                i 1
                                      IND-ATK
                AdvIND-ATK
                   KEM,A (λ) := Pr ExpKEM,A (λ) = 1 −   .
                                                      2

2.3   Message Authentication Codes

A Message Authentication Code (MAC) is a symmetric scheme that can be used
to ensure integrity and authenticity of messages. A MAC scheme comprises three
algorithms.

1. k ←$ KGen(λ): The probabilistic algorithm KGen takes the security parame-
   ter λ as input and generates a key k.
2. τ ←$ Tag(k, m): The probabilistic algorithm Tag maps a key k and a message
   m ∈ {0, 1}∗ to a tag τ .
3. d ← Vrfy(k, m, τ ): The deterministic algorithm Vrfy takes a key k, a message
   m and a tag τ and outputs a decision d ∈ {true, false}, indicating if the tag
   is valid for given message and key.
6         S. Clermont and J. Henrich

    The algorithms operate over key-, message-, and tag-spaces, which we refer
to as K, M, T , respectively.
    We call a MAC scheme perfectly correct, iff

                              Vrfy(k, m, Tag(k, m)) = true

for any k ←$ KGen(λ) and m ∈ M.


ExpEUF-CMA
   M ac,A  (λ):                                         OTag (k, ·) on input m:
    1 k ←$ KGen(λ)                                       5 τ ←$ Tag(k, m)
    2 Lm ← ∅                                             6 Lm ← Lm ∪ {m}
                  O                                      7 return τ
    3 (m, τ ) ←$ A Tag
                                 / Lm K
    4 return JVrfy(k, m, τ ) ∧ m ∈

            Fig. 2. Game definition for EUF-CMA security of MAC schemes.



Definition 2 (EUF-CMA security of MAC schemes). Given the security
game in Figure 2, we define the advantage of an adversary A against the EUF-CMA
security of a MAC scheme MAC as:

                 AdvEUF-CMA    (λ) := Pr ExpEUF-CMA
                                                            
                     MAC,A                   MAC      (A) = 1 .

2.4     Key Derivation Functions
For analyzing the security of multi-input KDFs (n-KDFs), as we use in the
constructions we will introduce later, we use the newly established notion by
Backendal et al. [1].
   An n-KDF is a deterministic algorithm, which we also refer to as a key
combiner, that takes up to n input pairs (σ1 , c1 ), . . . , (σn , cn ), a protocol-specific
label lbl, and a desired output length L, producing a combined key K:
                                                                   
                       K ← F (σ1 , c1 ), . . . , (σn , cn ), lbl, L .

The secret key material σi is the secret on which the n-KDF is evaluated, typ-
ically a shared secret established by a key exchange protocol. ci denotes con-
text information relevant to the creation of the key material input (e.g., in a
Diffie–Hellman style key exchange, g xy is the secret σ and a description of the
underlying algebraic group together with the shares g x , g y is the context c). The
label lbl is a fixed string that identifies the protocol and purpose of the derived
key, providing domain separation and preventing cross-protocol attacks.
    The inputs (σi , ci ) are sampled from so-called key material sources, denoted
by Σ, which can be of different types. E.g. , keys obtained from a KEM-style key
agreement protocol are sampled from some source ΣKEM , while keys obtained
by a QKD system are sampled from ΣQKD . The set of sources used by a KDF is
                                    HAKE for QKD(N) without Signatures           7

denoted as the source collection Σ. The mapping from key material sources to
the input position of the KDF is fixed and encoded in a variable called Σ-map.
The combiner function F used in the protocol presented in the next section
expects a key (and associated context) from ΣKEM as its first input, and ΣQKD
as its second input.
    Security is defined using a real-or-random indistinguishability game that can
be customized using a predicate req, which will be reqHybrid throughout this
paper. This predicate, as introduced by Backendal et al., intuitively requires
that one of the sources of key material (i.e., either ΣKEM or ΣQKD ) consistently
outputs “good”, i.e. keys that are not known by an adversary. In the indistin-
guishability game, an adversary has the ability to run the n-KDF honestly with
arbitrary inputs and has access to a challenge oracle that evaluates either the
real n-KDF or outputs a uniformly random key for new inputs. We write the
advantage of an adversary against the KDF security of F with sources Σ and
predicate req as Advkdf
                      A,Σ,req (λ).
    The security bounds demonstrated by Backendal et al. that are relevant
for this work are based on the unpredictability of a key material source Σ.
Intuitively, this means that, given all observable information, an adversary is
unable to predict the keys obtained from this key exchange. This effectively
reduces proving the security of the combiner to proving that the key exchange
protocol generates random keys, a notion captured by the SK security discussed
in Section 2.5. We write Advup   A,Σ (λ) to denote the advantage of an adversary
A against the unpredictability of source Σ. This unpredictability of the session
keys is a weaker notion than the pseudorandomness obtained from key exchanges
shown to be secure in the CK01 model [1, Lemma 23].
    We choose this security model for our analysis because it explicitly allows
leakage of some input secrets. This could be caused by a quantum computer
breaking classical assumptions, or by a faulty implementation of Quantum Key
Distribution, which is exactly the setting we are interested in.
    The concrete instantiation chosen for our implementation and used during
benchmarks is the “Random-Oracle-Based Construction” [1, Figure 4], instanti-
ated with SHA-3-256 [17].

2.5   Authenticated Key Exchange
Since our work builds on the work by Boyd et al. [8], our results are in the same
security model for authenticated key exchange, which, in turn, adopts the work
by Canetti and Krawczyk [10], often referred to as the CK01-model. We adopt
their notion of SK-secure AKE algorithms and call a protocol Π a secure authen-
ticated key exchange, if it is SK-secure and provides PFS (formally defined in the
PFS paragraph below). We will now formally introduce the required definitions.

The CK01 Setting: In the CK01 model, a key exchange is a message-driven pro-
tocol executed between two parties. Multiple instances of a protocol can be run
in parallel between parties. We call each singular run a session and character-
ize it by the tuple (Pi , Pj , s, role), where Pi intends to communicate with Pj in
8         S. Clermont and J. Henrich

a session with the identifier s and Pi has the role role ∈ {initiator, responder}.
When a party completes its session, it computes its local output, which, most
importantly, includes the session key.

Definition 3. Matching Sessions We call two sessions matching, when for a
session at Pi of the form (Pi , Pj , s, initiator) a corresponding session at Pj of the
form (Pj , Pi , s′ , responder) exists and s = s′ .

    Selecting adequate session identifiers is outside the scope of the model. We
follow Krawczyk et al.’s assumption that there is some higher-level communi-
cation protocol ensuring the setup of unique session identifiers, e.g., by using a
concatenation of random values generated by each party [10].
    The model is initialized during a setup phase, where all participating parties
generate their long-term keys without any influence from the adversary and make
them available to all potential communication partners. Only after completing
this initialization step can the adversary start interacting with the parties.

SK-secure key exchange: We now discuss what the CK01 model requires for AKE
protocols to be secure, stating the adversary capabilities followed by the security
definition. For the full formalization, we refer to [10,8].
    In the CK01 model, an adversary has full control over all communication: it
can withhold, fabricate, misdirect, or faithfully deliver messages, and can initi-
ate protocol runs between parties. This complete control includes the ability to
observe all messages sent as part of the protocol (which might be encrypted).
    In addition to controlling the message flow, the adversary has access to oracles
that reveal secrets, modeling partial corruptions in the system. Specifically, the
adversary has access to three oracles
    – Corrupt Oracle. This allows an adversary to learn a party’s current internal
      state, including all its local secrets.
    – Session-State Oracle. This allows an adversary to learn the internal state of a
      given session at a given party. The affected session must not have completed
      (i.e., derived the shared key) when the query is issued.
    – Reveal Oracle. This allows an adversary to reveal the session key for a com-
      pleted session.
    Then, there is a Test Oracle. The adversary can query the Test oracle for
any completed (i.e. calculated a session key) and fresh (i.e. the adversary cannot
trivially obtain the session key) session (Pi , Pj , s). Depending on a bit b, the
oracle will output either the actual session key or a uniform bitstring of the
same length.
    To model forward secrecy, a fifth oracle is added to the model.
    – Expire-Session Oracle. This oracle expires a session, which deletes the derived
      session key at the respective parties.

Definition 4 (Freshness (informal)). A session (Pi , Pj , s, role) is fresh (and
can thus be tested by an adversary), if the following conditions hold:
                                      HAKE for QKD(N) without Signatures        9

 1. The session key has not been revealed.
 2. The session state has not been revealed.
 3. If it has been corrupted, it must have been expired first.
 4. The same holds for the matching session (Pj , Pi , s, role′ ).

Observe that our definition of freshness includes forward secrecy.

Perfect Forward Secrecy Perfect forward secrecy (PFS) guarantees that previ-
ously established session keys remain secure even if long-term keys are later
compromised. We model PFS in the CK01 model using the Expire-Session Or-
acle. Namely, a session is still considered fresh (and can therefore be tested by
the adversary), even if it has been corrupted before, as long as the session has
been expired before the corruption.
Definition 5 (Key-indistinguishability security (informal)). The secu-
rity of an AKE protocol Π is defined using the key indistinguishability experi-
ment ExpKey-IND
          Π,A    (λ). The adversary has the aforementioned capabilities and or-
acles with the objective of successfully identifying a real key from a random key
without violating any freshness conditions. The advantage of A is defined as
                                     h                   i 1
                 AdvKey-IND
                    Π,A     (λ) := Pr  ExpKey-IND
                                          Π,A     (λ) = 1 − .
                                                           2

Definition 6 (SK-Security). A key exchange protocol Π is SK-secure, if the
following two conditions hold:

(1) If two uncompromised parties complete matching sessions of the protocol Π,
    they obtain the same session key.
(2) Any efficient adversary A attacking key-indistinguishability of protocol Π
    has at most a negligible advantage over randomly guessing.

    We extend this definition to the PQ setting by requiring indistinguishability
from random for a quantum polynomial time (QPT) adversary. Since the par-
ties performing the key exchange use classical hardware, we do not grant the
adversary superposition access to any of the key exchange oracles. For the QKD
protocol, the central entity is the detector that measures the incoming particles,
which we also do not need to model with a quantum oracle.
    To prevent trivial wins, Definition 6 requires the adversary to test a fresh
session. Informally, a session is fresh if the adversary does not trivially know
the session key, i.e. by corrupting both parties involved in a key exchange or
revealing the secret of the tested session.


2.6   QKD as a special case of AKE

Quantum Key Distribution (QKD) is a key establishment protocol whose secu-
rity relies on fundamental physical principles rather than computational hard-
ness assumptions, dating back to the seminal work of Bennett and Brassard [4].
10      S. Clermont and J. Henrich

Despite a long research history, challenges remain for mainstream adoption, in-
cluding limited range (roughly 150 km) and low key rates in the neighborhood
of single-digit kbit/s. While acknowledging these limitations, European cyberse-
curity agencies agree that research must continue [20].
    Due to the nature of QKD, functionality is provided by specialized hardware
devices (QKD nodes) with physical connections to neighboring nodes. These
nodes continuously negotiate key material, which is made available to clients
via an interface standardized by the European Telecommunications Standards
Institute (ETSI) in GS QKD 014 [38]. A Key Management System (KMS) is
typically situated above the QKD node to manage keys and facilitate user access.
Communication partners obtain a QKD key from their respective nodes using a
qkdKeyId, assigned uniformly at random by the QKD node.

Definition 7 (QKD Interface). Two parties connected to neighboring QKD
nodes have the following functionality available to establish shared keys:

 – (qkdKeyId, kqkd ) ←$ GetKey: When the algorithm GetKey is called with no
   input, it selects an available QKD key and returns it along with the corre-
   sponding unique identifier.
 – kqkd /⊥ ← GetKeyById(qkdKeyId): The algorithm has to be executed at the
   partnered node, where the corresponding key will be retrieved, or an error
   will be indicated by outputting the dedicated failure symbol ⊥.

Each key can be output at most once; repeated queries to GetKeyById with a
previously used qkdKeyId return ⊥.

    In order to establish a shared key using QKD, the initiating party retrieves
a QKD key and an associated identifier qkdKeyId from its QKD node us-
ing GetKey. It then transmits qkdKeyId to the intended partner, who uses
GetKeyById(qkdKeyId) to retrieve the same key from its own QKD node, thereby
finalizing the key exchange. We call this protocol ΠQKD .
    For this paper, we view QKD as a black box that delivers truly random
keys as promised, including the classical communication over an authenticated
channel. Established protocols include BB84 [4], Ekert91 [19], and BBM92 [5],
which rely on two orthogonal quantum states, entanglement in combination with
Bell inequalities, and entanglement with complementary bases, respectively.
    Unlike other approaches such as [24,9] we do not model QKD with all its
intricate details. This black-box abstraction is justified for two reasons. First, it
preserves generality: modeling protocol-specific details (detector characteristics,
authentication of the classical channel) would tie the analysis to a particular
QKD implementation, whereas our construction is generic. Second, it is con-
sistent with the established approach in the QKD security literature, where
unconditional security proofs [32] yield a composable guarantee that the out-
put is indistinguishable from ideal random keys, up to a failure probability. We
collect all possible deviations from ideal behavior, including implementation vul-
nerabilities and side-channel leaks, under a single umbrella event QKD fail. The
concrete probability Pr[QKD fail] can be instantiated from the security proof
                                     HAKE for QKD(N) without Signatures          11

of the specific QKD protocol deployed, or set conservatively based on the risk
tolerance of the deploying entity.

Lemma 1. ΠQKD as described above is SK-secure (which in our definitions in-
cludes PFS) against any unbounded adversary A. It holds that

                          AdvSK-secure
                             ΠQKD ,A (λ) ≤ Pr[QKD fail],                        (1)

where the event QKD fail indicates that the underlying QKD system failed in any
way, e.g., by not returning identical keys for identical key identifiers, the output
key not being uniformly random, or even just a constant value.

   This notion combines correctness (identical keys for identical identifiers) and
security (here: SK security) into one convenient term.

Proof. While this claim has been analyzed with much greater formal rigor (but
similar results) than here, e.g., in [32], this proof will show how to achieve the
stated bound when assuming QKD to work as a black box.
    First, we show that black-box QKD achieves key indistinguishability via a
series of game hops.

Game0 (λ): We start with the regular key indistinguishability game ExpKey-IND
                                                                      ΠQKD ,A (λ)
Game1 (λ): First, we modify the Corrupt Oracle to only return empty sets. This
   modification is undetectable by the adversary, as neither parties hold any
   state.
Game2 (λ): Now, we modify the Session-State Oracle to return empty sets. As
   with our first modification, this is undetectable, as the parties do not hold
   state.
Game3 (λ): Next, we modify the Reveal Oracle to always return truly random
   strings. This modification is undetectable by the adversary, as successful
   execution of the protocol yields a truly random session key. The exception
   to this is some failure in the QKD system, which results in non-uniform keys
   being output. This happens exactly with Pr[QKD fail], which is exactly the
   success probability of a distinguisher D distinguishing Game 3 and Game 2.
Game4 (λ): Finally, we modify the Test Oracle to always return random keys. As
   with our previous modification to the Reveal Oracle, this is undetectable to
   the adversary because real keys are truly random.

    Since the game’s behavior is now completely independent of the secret bit b,
the best strategy for the adversary is to guess. In particular, due to the modifi-
cation of the Corrupt Oracle, forward secrecy is also achieved. As a result, ΠQKD
achieves Key-IND up to Pr[QKD fail].
    The second requirement for a protocol to be SK-secure is that successfully
completing the protocol must yield identical session keys for both parties. This
is guaranteed by the underlying QKD system up to a likelihood of Pr[QKD fail].
    The requirement combination yields SK security up to the claimed bound.
12     S. Clermont and J. Henrich

Remark 1. Lemma 1 gives a security bound for any unbounded adversary. We
note that this directly implies security against the strictly weaker class of QPT
adversaries, which we will use in Theorem 1.

   We also note that due to the lack of classical long-term identity keys in
QKD systems, they are, by definition, resistant to key compromise impersonation
(KCI) attacks. Specifically, within our black-box model, the QKD sub-protocol
does not expose an extractable long-term secret to the adversary.


2.7   Hybrid AKE

By Hybrid Authenticated Key Exchange (HAKE) we refer to utilizing multi-
ple key exchange protocols simultaneously to achieve enhanced security even in
the event that all except one of the component algorithms is compromised. We
propose a direct construction for a hybrid authenticated key exchange based on
KEMs and QKD, combining the resulting keys via a KDF following the paradigm
proposed by BSI [18]. For our analysis, we adhere to the established CK01 model
rather than the modified Bellare-Rogaway-style security model introduced by
Dowling et al. [16].


3     The KEM-based HAKE protocol

A two-step approach is followed in the construction of the HAKE:

1. Execution of two different key exchanges. To achieve the desired hybridiza-
   tion properties, different hardness assumptions are used. (In this case QKD
   and regular cryptography.)
2. Key combination by means of a combiner function maintaining security as
   long as one of the component keys is secure, as described in Section 2.4.

These substeps can be carried out either sequentially or in parallel. In our con-
struction, the QKD messages are sent in parallel with the PQ key exchange
of [8], as illustrated in Figure 3. Two preconditions must be taken into account:

1. Both, Alice and Bob must maintain a permanent key pair (ska , pka ) and
   (skb , pkb ) that is tied to their respective identity. They also know the public
   key of the intended communication partner.
2. Both parties have to have access to QKD nodes that directly communicate
   with each other by means of an appropriate physical connection for execut-
   ing the underlying QKD protocol. The keys are obtained via a well-defined
   interface, as previously outlined in Definition 7.


3.1   Protocol Flow

Figure 3 illustrates the full protocol flow for our newly proposed PQC-QKD
HAKE protocol ΠHAKE . It consists of two independent key exchanges, with the
                                                        HAKE for QKD(N) without Signatures                         13

Alice                                                                    Bob
pka , ska , pkb                                                          pkb , skb , pka

k1 , ct1 ←$ Encaps(pkb )

                                                             ct1

                                                                         pke , ske ←$ KGen(1λ )
                                                                         k′1 ← Decaps(skb , ct1 )
                                                                         k2 , ct2 ←$ Encaps(pka )
                                                                         s ← ct1 ∥ ct2
                                                                         τ1 ←$ Tag(k′1 , pke ∥s∥A)

                                                        pke , τ1 , ct2

s ← ct1 ∥ ct2
if ⊥ = Vrfy(k1 , pke ∥s∥A, τ1 )
  fail
k′2 ← Decaps(ska , ct2 )
k∗ , ct∗ ←$ Encaps(pke )
kqkd , qkdKeyId ←$ GetKey
τ2 ←$ Tag(k′2 , qkdKeyId ∥ ct∗ ∥ s ∥ B)

                                                  ct∗ , qkdKeyId, τ2

                                                                         if ⊥ = Vrfy(k2 , qkdKeyId∥ct∗ ∥s∥B, τ2 )
                                                                           fail
                                                                         k∗ ← Decaps(ske , ct∗ )
                                                                         kqkd ← GetKeyById(qkdKeyId)
                                                                         if ⊥ = kqkd
                                                                           fail


  // Inputs defined in Section 3.1                                         // Bob performs same computation as Alice
kh ← F(((σΠKEM , cΠKEM ), (σΠQKD , cΠQKD )),                             kh ← F(. . .)
              ”KEM-QKD-Hybrid KEX”, 512)
                                                                           // Key is split into two equal halves
                                                                         k1h ∥k2h ← kh
                                                                           // First half of key
                                                                           // Used for key confirmation
                                                                         τ3 ←$ Tag(k1h , k1 ∥qkdKeyId∥pke ∥τ1 ∥k2 ∥τ2 )

                                                             τ3

k1h ∥k2h ← kh
if ⊥ = Vrfy(k1h , k1 ∥qkdKeyId∥pke ∥τ1 ∥k2 ∥τ2 , τ3 )
  fail



Fig. 3. Our proposed HAKE protocol ΠHAKE between Alice and Bob combining a KEM-
based and a QKD key agreement. k2h is the final 256-bit key shared between both
parties. It is assumed that the parties own a public KEM key pka and pkb , respectively,
of each other. The QKD part of the protocol is composed of the highlighted actions.
Note that the KEM and QKD sub-protocols operate independently (cf. Lemma 2); the
second message from Alice to Bob batches transmissions from both sub-protocols to
reduce round trips.
14      S. Clermont and J. Henrich

bulk of the messages being attributed to the scheme originally proposed by Boyd
et al. [8] which realizes the desired functionality using generic KEMs as its only
building block. The QKD part of the protocol requires fewer messages, which
are highlighted in the protocol.
    From a high-level perspective, Alice and Bob first use their long-term public
keys to authenticate each other. To achieve forward secrecy, Bob generates a new
ephemeral KEM keypair rather than using his long-term key directly; otherwise,
compromise of the static secret key would reveal all past session keys. In parallel,
they use their QKD access to establish a second shared key. Initially, Alice
requests a fresh key from her KMS using GetKey and receives the key and its
ID qkdKeyId. The ID is then transmitted to Bob, who uses it to retrieve the
same key from his respective KMS. To reduce the number of messages, the ID
is transmitted in parallel with a message from the KEM based AKE protocol.
In general, the establishment of QKD keys necessitates a significantly greater
investment of time and computing power than is required for KEM operations
[33,30,9]. Furthermore, once a key has been requested at the QKD interface, it
cannot be used a second time, as outlined in Definition 7. Consequently, the
QKD key requests are executed in the latter phase of the protocol. In the event
of an issue, such as a failure in the KEM-based authentication, no QKD key is
wasted. Following the conclusion of both key exchanges, both parties run a key
combiner in order to obtain the final hybrid key.
    As explained in Section 2.4, our combiner design is based on the research
by Backendal et al. and one of their proposed constructions based on SHA-3 [1,
Theorem 8]. We will refer to the KDF as F. For evaluating (and later analyzing)
the combiner-KDF in Backendal et al.’s security model, we need to define sources
of key material (and the resulting secrets and contexts) as well as a label for the
final execution of the combiner.

KEM-based AKE: For the KEM-based AKE protocol ΠKEM , the secret σΠKEM
is the key resulting from the final decapsulation step and the context cΠKEM is
composed of all public keys, the transcript of the KEM-based sub-protocol and
the identities Alice (A) and Bob (B):

                      σΠKEM := k∗
                      cΠKEM := A∥pka ∥B∥pkb ∥pke ∥k1 ∥k2 ∥k∗


QKD-based AKE: Due to the characteristics of QKD, it is much simpler to
identify secret key material and context for the QKD-based AKE (ΠQKD ):

                      σΠQKD := kqkd
                      cΠQKD := A∥B∥qkdKeyId

The label lbl is a fixed, protocol-specific string that provides domain separation,
ensuring that keys derived for different protocols or purposes cannot be confused;
for our implementation, the string KEM-QKD-Hybrid KEX is used. The output
                                     HAKE for QKD(N) without Signatures          15

length is chosen to be 512 bits, leaving both parties with 256 usable bits after
the key confirmation step.
    The aforementioned key confirmation step occurs after the key combiner is
executed and ensures that both parties have derived identical keys. It is impor-
tant not to use the final key for this step, as this might leak information related
to this final key. Instead, the output of the combiner, kh is split into two keys
of equal length, k1h and k2h . k1h will be used for key confirmation, while k2h
is the resulting key of the protocol. The key confirmation itself is carried out
using a MAC that authenticates the entire transcript of the conversation. The
tag is created by Bob and verified by Alice. Note that the key confirmation is
one-directional (Bob to Alice). Full mutual confirmation would require an ad-
ditional message, but cannot provide both parties with equal assurance due to
the well-known impossibility result for coordinated agreement [10]. In practice,
the first message Alice sends using the derived key k2h serves as implicit con-
firmation to Bob. The long-term public keys assumed above can be distributed
by direct pre-distribution in small networks, via a QKDN controller acting as a
trusted third party, or via a PKI [9,3]; our “without signatures” property con-
cerns the online protocol execution, so any such bootstrapping—which incurs
signature operations only as a one-time setup cost—is fully compatible with our
construction.


4   Security

We now give the formal security statements for the HAKE protocol introduced
in the previous sections. Intuitively, the security of the protocol follows from the
security of either the KEM-based AKE or the security of the QKD system, as
long as one of the component keys remains secure.
    The two component key exchanges based on KEMs and QKD are indepen-
dent, so their security can be proven individually. The hybrid guarantee is then
established via a key combiner that binds both transcripts to the final key. We
start by establishing this independence, which is the foundation for the modular
analysis.

Lemma 2 (Independence of sub-protocols). ΠHAKE as proposed in Figure 3
is composed of the KEM based AKE protocol ΠKEM , the QKD-based AKE proto-
col ΠQKD and a final combiner step using F. The two sub-protocols process their
messages independently: neither sub-protocol’s computation depends on secrets
or intermediate values of the other.

Proof. The messages of ΠKEM and ΠQKD are processed separately throughout the
protocol. The only shared message is the second transmission from Alice to Bob,
which batches messages from both sub-protocols into one network packet. This is
a transport-level optimization that does not create a cryptographic dependency,
as the message can equivalently be split into two separate transmissions without
affecting the security reduction.
16     S. Clermont and J. Henrich

  Next, we establish the SK security of the two component protocols in the
CK01 model.
Lemma 3 (SK security of the KEM based AKE). Let A be an adversary
against SK security. Observe that ΠHAKE as proposed in Figure 3 without the
gray boxes representing the QKD part and the combiner actions at the end is
an instance of a KEM-based authenticated key exchange as proposed and proven
secure by Boyd et al. [8, Figure 8]. Since these extra messages are handled in-
dependently, they do not affect the security of the key exchange, which is shown
to be SK-secure by Boyd et al. [8, Theorem 2,3,4] with the following bound for
efficient QPT adversaries B, D, and F:

         AdvSK-secure
            ΠKEM ,A (λ) ≤
                                              
             ℓ · AdvCCA              EUF−CMA             CPA
                      KEM,D (λ) + AdvM AC,F (λ) + ℓ · AdvKEM,B (λ),


where ℓ := n2 q, n denotes the number of parties, and q the number of challenge
messages. The adversaries are as defined in [8].
Proof Outline. The proof composes Theorems 2, 3, and 4 of [8]; we refer to the
original work for full details and highlight the main steps here.
    Following the approach of [10], the protocol is first proven secure in the au-
thenticated links model, where adversaries cannot tamper with messages. Then,
using a KEM-based authenticator, the protocol is lifted to the real-world setting
of unauthenticated links. The resulting bound is additive, equal to the sum of
the bounds for the protocol itself and the authenticator.
    In the stated bound, the IND-CCA security of the KEM and EUF-CMA
of the MAC scheme are due to the authenticator, while the IND-CPA security
of the underlying KEM is required by the key exchange in the authenticated
links model. Adversaries B, D, F are as defined in [8, Proof of Theorem 3,4]. The
multiplicative factor ℓ accounts for the probability that the inner adversary in
the reduction selects the target session in which the challenge is embedded.
Theorem 1 (SK security of ΠHAKE ). Let ΠHAKE be the protocol introduced in
Figure 3. A QPT adversary A attacking the scheme has its success probability
bound by the term
                                      
           AdvSK-secure
               ΠHAKE ,A (λ) ≤ 2 · min
                                                
           ℓ · AdvCCA
                   KEM,D    (λ) + Adv EUF−CMA
                                      M AC,F  (λ)  + ℓ · AdvCPA
                                                            KEM,B (λ),
                                                
                                    Pr[QKD fail] ,

   where ℓ := n2 q, n denotes the number of parties and q the number of challenge
queries and B, D, F are the QPT adversaries as defined in Lemma 3.
Proof. The proof is composed of four components:
1. Independence of ΠKEM and ΠQKD (Lemma 2)
                                      HAKE for QKD(N) without Signatures        17

 2. SK security of the KEM based AKE protocol (Lemma 3)
 3. SK security of the QKD-based AKE protocol (Lemma 1)
 4. Combiner Security of the KDF F (This proof and [1, Thm. 9])

    In combination, the first three components, with the proofs stated in the
associated lemmas above, allow us to focus on the security of the combiner
function F for this proof. We have established that the two component-protocols
are secure by themselves, it remains to prove that our combiner function F is a
good combiner function that maintains SK security of the hybrid protocol ΠHAKE
against QPT adversaries, as long as one of its components remains secure.
    We show this result by following the work from Backendal et al. [1, Theorem
9]. Recall that our protocol uses the so-called RO − KDF, instantiated with SHA-
3 with a fixed output length of 512 bits, as described in Section 2.4. SHA-3 is
based on the Keccak sponge construction, which is indifferentiable from a random
oracle [6], justifying the random oracle modeling used in Theorem 9 of [1]. Our
instantiation is a 2-KDF with the source collection Σ containing the two sources
ΣKEM and ΣQKD . The Σ-map maps ΣKEM to the first input and ΣQKD to the
second input. Domain separation is achieved through the protocol-specific label
lbl and the inclusion of both sub-protocol transcripts in the context, preventing
cross-protocol attacks. Since we are building a QKD/PQ hybrid, we use the
predicate reqHybrid to determine which queries the adversary is allowed to make.
SHA-3 is a non-extendable output function (i.e. queries with the same values,
but different output lengths do not return values that are prefixes of each other),
also called NOF. Therefore, the freshness predicate by Backendal et al. for this
type of output behavior reqN also applies here.
    This exact setup was analyzed by Backendal et al., allowing us to directly
apply [1, Theorem 9], yielding the following bound for an adversary G attacking
the combiner function F with QPT adversaries C and E:

           Advkdf
              F,A,Σ,reqN ∧reqHybrid (λ) ≤

                             2 · min(Advup               up
                                        F,C,ΣKEM (λ), AdvF,E,ΣQKD (λ)).

This establishes combiner security: F yields a secure key provided that either
source is unpredictable.
    It remains to connect this to AKE security of the full protocol ΠHAKE .
The reduction proceeds as follows: SK security of ΠKEM (Lemma 3) and ΠQKD
(Lemma 1) implies pseudorandomness of the respective session keys, which in
turn implies unpredictability [1, Lemma 23]. Substituting the SK security bounds
of the two component schemes into the above inequality yields the claimed bound
for ΠHAKE .

    The min term in the final bound is exactly what we aim to achieve and gives
us the desired property of the protocol being as secure as its best component.
    While Theorem 1 establishes security in the well-established CK01 model,
two advanced security properties might also be of interest. The first is security
against unknown key-share (UKS) attacks, as first described in [15]. In ΠHAKE ,
18     S. Clermont and J. Henrich

both parties include the identity of their intended partner as part of the context
information into the final key derivation step. Consequently any confusion about
the communication partner would yield different keys for both partners, causing
the key confirmation step to fail.
    The second property is security against key compromise impersonation (KCI)
attacks. Such attacks are possible if the final key depends only on the long-
term key of one of the parties. However, running ΠHAKE includes calculating two
MAC tags, one with a key resulting from an encapsulation under Alice’s identity
key and the other from encapsulating under Bob’s identity key. An adversary
who has compromised one party’s long-term key can compute the corresponding
MAC tag, but cannot forge the tag derived from the uncompromised party’s
key without breaking the IND-CCA security of the KEM. In combination with
our earlier observation that the sub-protocol ΠQKD is also resistant against such
attacks, we obtain security against KCI-style attacks for the resulting protocol
ΠHAKE .
Conditional ITS Security. The min() expression in the security bound of The-
orem 1 reveals an interesting subtlety: if the QKD system is working as intended,
the hybridization does not degrade security to be resistant “only” against QPT
adversaries, but maintains security against unbounded adversaries. This covers
both conditions of SK security (Definition 6): key agreement and key indistin-
guishability. Authentication of the classical channel is an integral part of the
QKD protocol and is subsumed by our black-box model, so an uncompromised
QKD sub-protocol independently provides both guarantees against unbounded
adversaries. This improvement is obtained by using the modern framework for
analyzing KDF security by Backendal et al. [1], which allows for a fine-grained
analysis of KDFs with multiple inputs. That the resulting proof of Theorem 2
is short reflects the power of this modular decomposition: the technical work
resides in establishing the min-bound of Theorem 1 and the QKD guarantee
of Lemma 1, after which the ITS conclusion follows directly. The contribution
is not a complex proof technique, but the identification that the combination
of a suitable combiner framework with QKD yields a guarantee that no purely
classical or PQC-only hybrid protocol can provide.
    We note that this result relies on the random oracle assumption used in [1,
Theorem 9], which our protocol instantiates with SHA-3. Precisely, Theorem 2
establishes information-theoretic security in the random oracle model : the only
idealization is the hash function, while the bound itself holds for computation-
ally unbounded adversaries. This is qualitatively different from computational
security guarantees that rely on the hardness of lattice or code-based problems,
since the random oracle models a single, fixed-length hash evaluation rather
than an asymptotic hardness assumption. A combiner achieving the same guar-
antee without the random oracle exists [1, Theorem 17] but lacks a standardized
implementation.

Theorem 2 (Information theoretic security of ΠHAKE ). Let ΠHAKE be the
protocol introduced in Figure 3. An unbounded adversary A attacking the scheme
                                    HAKE for QKD(N) without Signatures         19

has its success probability bound by the term

                       AdvSK-secure
                          ΠHAKE ,A (λ) ≤ 2 · Pr[QKD fail].


    This is a significant improvement over using the HKDF scheme as suggested
by NIST [2], which also yields hybrid guarantees, but only in a computational
setting [29, Theorem 4], since its security proof inherently relies on the pseudo-
randomness of HMAC.

Proof. By Theorem 1, the advantage of any adversary against ΠHAKE is bounded
by 2 · min(·, Pr[QKD fail]). The first argument of the min depends on computa-
tional assumptions and is therefore only meaningful for QPT adversaries. How-
ever, the second argument, Pr[QKD fail], is established in Lemma 1 without any
computational assumption and holds for unbounded adversaries. Since the min
is at most its smallest argument, the bound 2 · Pr[QKD fail] applies regardless of
the adversary’s computational power, yielding the claimed result.

    In summary, ΠHAKE achieves a best-of-both-worlds guarantee: as long as the
QKD component remains uncompromised, the protocol achieves full SK security
against unbounded adversaries, even if all computational assumptions underly-
ing the KEM-based AKE are broken. This strictly exceeds what classical–PQC
hybrid protocols can offer and highlights the advantage of integrating QKD into
a modular hybrid design. Conversely, if the QKD system is compromised, the
KEM-based component ensures that the protocol remains secure against QPT
adversaries under standard cryptographic assumptions, preserving the hybrid
safety net.


5     Implementation and Evaluation

Based on the aforementioned protocol, a Hybridization Service (HS) was im-
plemented. The source code is freely accessible and can be found at our Gitlab
Repository3 . HS has been written in the Go programming language and is run
within a Docker container. It offers two interfaces, S1 and S2 . S1 is employed
for the purposes of initial communication and control by a higher-level applica-
tion. It facilitates the transmission of a hybridization request, encompassing the
address data of the opposing HS, in addition to the QKD key to be hybridized
and its id. HS is also capable of acquiring a specific QKD key via S1 using the
QKD key id. S2 is employed to facilitate the exchange of a PQC key with an-
other HS instance, based on an initially configured KEM. The implementation
of the PQC schemes is achieved through the utilization of liboqs [35] and the
liboqs Go wrapper [34]. The Go crypto package [43] provides functionality for
the implementation of traditional cryptographic mechanisms. The transmission
of data is facilitated by the use of Transmission Control Protocol (TCP).
3
    https://code.fbi.h-da.de/hybridizekeyservice/gohybridizekeyservice
20      S. Clermont and J. Henrich

5.1   Benchmarking Setup

The evaluation was conducted using a server configured with Ubuntu 24.04 LTS,
8 vCPUs (AMD EPYC Milan (DDR4-3200 ECC), 2.25 GHz), 16 GB RAM. Two
Docker containers were executed, each containing an HS instance, designated HS
Alice and HS Bob, respectively. Furthermore, two additional Docker containers
each contain a KMS instance, designated KMS Alice and KMS Bob, respectively.
HS Alice and HS Bob are assigned to their respective KMS and connected to
them via S1 . In addition, the HS instances are connected to each other via S2 .
    The evaluation encompassed the entire protocol sequence, commencing from
the hybridization request via S1 , culminating in the key receipt. The public and
private keys necessary for KEM-based authentication were generated before-
hand. Alice possesses its own key pair, (pka , ska ), as well as Bob’s pkb , stored
within its internal memory. In the case of Bob the situation is reversed. Fur-
thermore, QKD keys have already been established. The hybridization process
can only be started once KMS Alice has a QKD key to hybridize and an asso-
ciated ID, meaning that cases where QKD key establishment has not yet taken
place are disregarded and part of KMS key management. Consequently, it is
not necessary to account for additional delays in the QKD key establishment
process. The pertinent standards and recommendations [26,27,38] also propose
the implementation of KMSs with designated storage for QKDN nodes, thereby
ensuring the establishment of QKD keys in advance and their maintenance in a
state of readiness, as described in [14]. An empty key storage is an undesirable
special case. Any delay caused by this will have an accumulating effect on the
total duration of the hybridization request.
    Each experiment consisted of 1000 measurements per configuration. A total of
three different KEMs were tested, each with security levels 1, 3, and 5. ML-KEM
(ML-KEM-512, ML-KEM-768, ML-KEM-1024 ) that has been standardized by
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), as well as FrodoKEM
(FrodoKEM-640-AES, FrodoKEM-976-AES, FrodoKEM-1344-AES ) and Classic
McEliece (Classic-McEliece-348864f, Classic-McEliece-460896f, Classic-McEliece-
6688128f ), which were recommended by other institutions, such as the German
BSI [20,18]. MAC was implemented using Hash-based MAC (HMAC) and SHA-
256. For the key combination, SHA3-512 was used.


5.2   Experimental Results

The results for the simple test configuration are presented in Figure 4 in the
form of a box plot diagram [36]. It is noteworthy that the ML-KEM variants
exhibited an average time requirement of 11 to 13 ms with minimal dispersion.
FrodoKEM is slightly slower, and the time penalties for the higher security
levels are somewhat greater. In contrast, the variants of Classic McEliece are
distinctly different. As demonstrated in Figure 4, the median values range from
approximately 50 ms for security level 1, to 113 ms for security level 3, and 150 ms
for security level 5. Since no network delays were emulated in this initial setup,
the results are dominated by the computational cost of the asymmetric schemes.
                                       HAKE for QKD(N) without Signatures         21

ML-KEM is highly efficient, whereas Classic McEliece exhibits significant latency
due to its key generation process (mceliece348864f 15-20 ms, mceliece6688128f
up to 150 ms [12]). In the case of mceliece6688128f, this delay can reach up to
150 ms [11,12]. For each KEM, the minimum, 0.25 quantile, and median are
close, indicating that most runs are near optimal.




                            150
            duration [ms]




                            100




                             50




                             0
                                            o1

                                            o3

                                    ce 5
                                  m ce1

                                  m ce3

                                  m e5

                                  m m1

                                  m m3

                                             5
                                            o




                                         em
                                           c
                                        od

                                        od

                                        od




                                         e

                                         e
                                       lie

                                       lie

                                       lie
                                     l-k

                                     l-k

                                     l-k
                                  fr

                                     fr

                                     fr



                                    ce

                                   ce
                                  m




Fig. 4. Hybridization duration when using the PQC KEMs FrodoKEM (FrodoKEM-
640-AES, FrodoKEM-976-AES, FrodoKEM-1344-AES ), Classic McEliece (Classic-
McEliece-348864f, Classic-McEliece-460896f, Classic-McEliece-6688128f ), and ML-
KEM (ML-KEM-512, ML-KEM-768, ML-KEM-1024 ). A total of 1,000 measurements
were conducted for each of the three security levels (1, 3, and 5). Box plot diagram,
which shows median, 0.25 quartile, 0.75 quartile, minimum, maximum, and outliers.


    In a subsequent series of tests, the delay between each message transmitted
between the HS instances was incremented by 20 ms. On average, the dura-
tion increases by 100 ms with the same KEM scheme when latency is increased
by 20 ms, as demonstrated in Table 1. The protocol requires five sequential
message transmissions (cf. Figure 3), so the observed increase of approximately
5×20 ms = 100 ms matches the expected behavior. However, the amount of data
to be transmitted becomes a salient factor, given that large messages are di-
vided into multiple packets and an additional sequential transmission introduces
an extra delay. It is important to note that the experiments did not consider
additional network constraints, such as diminished bandwidth, packet loss, or
22      S. Clermont and J. Henrich

flow and congestion control under TCP. For a more comprehensive overview,
please refer to the works of Paquin et al. [37] and Henrich et al. [23]. In particu-
lar, FrodoKEM and Classic McEliece possess significantly large key sizes, which
would further reduce throughput under a limited TCP congestion window or
constrained bandwidth.


      Duration 0ms Latency [ms] 20ms Latency [ms] Difference [ms]
      Frodo1           14.503868           115.600346          101.096478
      Frodo3           17.226027           117.882171          100.656144
      Frodo5           20.746900           121.583129          100.836229
      McEliece1        47.279915           147.685722          100.405807
      McEliece3       113.400480           213.590071          100.189591
      McEliece5       147.971071           248.159086          100.188015
      ML-KEM1          11.472463           112.238871          100.766408
      ML-KEM3          11.239579           112.292954          101.053375
      ML-KEM5          11.630536           112.322540          100.692004


Table 1. Median measured hybridization time for different KEM schemes. Columns
illustrate measurements for direct connection (0 ms) and with added latency of 20 ms,
as well as the difference between them.




    Since QKD modules are limited to distances of 100–150 km, message delays
beyond 20 ms are unlikely in typical deployments [31,45], and the evaluation thus
covers the relevant use case. Even in the worst case (Classic McEliece at security
level 5 with 20 ms latency), the total hybridization time remains below 250 ms,
which is acceptable for applications where key establishment can be performed
ahead of time.


6    Conclusion and Future Work

We have presented a hybrid authenticated key exchange protocol that combines
PQC and QKD without requiring digital signature schemes during protocol ex-
ecution. By applying the multi-input KDF framework of Backendal et al. [1],
we obtain a modular security proof in the CK01 model with a transparent min-
bound (Theorem 1), and show that conditional information-theoretic security is
achieved when the QKD component is uncompromised (Theorem 2). Our bench-
marks confirm that the protocol is practical, with ML-KEM-based instantiations
completing in under 15 ms and remaining well within acceptable latency bounds
even under realistic network delays.
   The elimination of signature schemes reduces the overall attack surface and
system complexity, including the administrative burden of maintaining a crypto-
inventory. However, the realization of these advantages is contingent on the spe-
                                      HAKE for QKD(N) without Signatures             23

cific cryptographic schemes employed and the fundamental requirements of the
system in question.
     Several directions for future work remain. The random oracle assumption
underlying the ITS guarantee can be removed by adopting the non-RO com-
biner of [1, Theorem 17] once a standardized implementation becomes available.
Extending the formal analysis to a composable security framework would allow
reasoning about the protocol’s use as a building block within larger systems.
Finally, a more fine-grained integration of the QKD model, capturing aspects
such as key synchronization and rate limitations, would further strengthen the
practical relevance of the security guarantees.


References
 1. Backendal, M., Clermont, S., Fischlin, M., Günther, F.: Key derivation functions
    without a grain of salt. In: Fehr, S., Fouque, P.A. (eds.) EUROCRYPT 2025,
    Part VIII. LNCS, vol. 15608, pp. 393–426. Springer, Cham, Switzerland, Madrid,
    Spain (May 4–8, 2025). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-91101-9_14
 2. Barker, E., Chen, L., (NIST), R.D.: Recommendation for key-derivation methods
    in key-establishment schemes. Tech. Rep. NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-56C-
    r2, National Institute of Standards an Technology (NIST), Gaithersburg, MD (Aug
    2020). https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-56Cr2
 3. Battarbee, C., Striecks, C., Perret, L., Ramacher, S., Verhaeghe, K.: Quantum-safe
    hybrid key exchanges with KEM-based authentication. EPJ Quantum Technology
    12(1), 128 (Dec 2025). https://doi.org/10.1140/epjqt/s40507-025-00425-3,
    https://epjquantumtechnology.springeropen.com/articles/10.1140/epjqt/
    s40507-025-00425-3
 4. Bennett, C.H., Brassard, G.: Quantum cryptography: Public key distri-
    bution and coin tossing. Theoretical Computer Science 560, 7–11 (Dec
    2014). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcs.2014.05.025, http://dx.doi.org/10.
    1016/j.tcs.2014.05.025
 5. Bennett, C.H., Brassard, G., Mermin, N.D.: Quantum cryptography without
    bell’s theorem. Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 557–559 (Feb 1992). https://doi.org/10.
    1103/PhysRevLett.68.557, https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.
    68.557
 6. Bertoni, G., Daemen, J., Peeters, M., Van Assche, G.: On the indifferentiability
    of the Sponge construction. In: Smart, N.P. (ed.) EUROCRYPT 2008. LNCS,
    vol. 4965, pp. 181–197. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Germany, Istanbul, Turkey
    (Apr 13–17, 2008). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-78967-3_11
 7. Bindel, N., Brendel, J., Fischlin, M., Goncalves, B., Stebila, D.: Hybrid key encap-
    sulation mechanisms and authenticated key exchange. In: Ding, J., Steinwandt, R.
    (eds.) PQCrypto 2019: Post-Quantum Cryptography. Lecture Notes in Computer
    Science, vol. 11505, pp. 206–226. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, DE (Juli 2019).
    https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-25510-7_12, veranstal-
    tungstitel: 10th International Conference on Post-Quantum Cryptography
 8. Boyd, C., de Kock, B., Millerjord, L.: Modular design of KEM-based authenticated
    key exchange. In: Simpson, L., Baee, M.A.R. (eds.) ACISP 23. LNCS, vol. 13915,
    pp. 553–579. Springer, Cham, Switzerland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia (Jul 5–7,
    2023). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-35486-1_24
24      S. Clermont and J. Henrich

 9. Bruckner, S., Ramacher, S., Striecks, C.: Muckle+: End-to-end hybrid authen-
    ticated key exchanges. In: Johansson, T., Smith-Tone, D. (eds.) Post-Quantum
    Cryptography. pp. 601–633. Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham (2023)
10. Canetti, R., Krawczyk, H.: Analysis of key-exchange protocols and their use for
    building secure channels. In: Pfitzmann, B. (ed.) EUROCRYPT 2001. LNCS,
    vol. 2045, pp. 453–474. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Germany, Innsbruck, Austria
    (May 6–10, 2001). https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-44987-6_28
11. Chen, M.S., Chou, T.: Classic McEliece on the ARM cortex-m4. Cryptology ePrint
    Archive, Paper 2021/492 (2021), https://eprint.iacr.org/2021/492
12. Chen, P.J., Chou, T., Deshpande, S., Lahr, N., Niederhagen, R., Szefer, J., Wang,
    W.: Complete and improved FPGA implementation of classic McEliece. IACR
    TCHES 2022(3), 71–113 (2022). https://doi.org/10.46586/tches.v2022.i3.
    71-113
13. Cramer, R., Shoup, V.: Design and analysis of practical public-key encryption
    schemes secure against adaptive chosen ciphertext attack. SIAM Journal on Com-
    puting 33(1), 167–226 (2003)
14. Dervisevic, E., Tankovic, A., Fazel, E., Kompella, R., Fazio, P., Voznak, M.,
    Mehic, M.: Quantum key distribution networks - key management: A survey.
    ACM Comput. Surv. 57(10) (May 2025). https://doi.org/10.1145/3730575,
    https://doi.org/10.1145/3730575
15. Diffie, W., van Oorschot, P.C., Wiener, M.J.: Authentication and authenticated key
    exchanges. DCC 2(2), 107–125 (1992). https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00124891
16. Dowling, B., Hansen, T.B., Paterson, K.G.: Many a mickle makes a muckle: A
    framework for provably quantum-secure hybrid key exchange. In: Ding, J., Tillich,
    J.P. (eds.) PQCrypto 2020. pp. 483–502. Springer, Cham, Switzerland, Paris,
    France (Apr 15–17, 2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-44223-1_26
17. Dworkin, M.J.: Sha-3 standard: Permutation-based hash and extendable-output
    functions: (2015-07-01 04:07:00 2015). https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.
    6028/NIST.FIPS.202
18. Ehlen, S., et al.: Kryptografie quantensicher gestalten. Tech. Rep. BSI-Bro21/01,
    Bundesamt für Sicherheit in der Informationstechnik (BSI) (2021)
19. Ekert, A.K.: Quantum cryptography based on bell’s theorem. Phys. Rev. Lett.
    67, 661–663 (Aug 1991). https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.67.661, https:
    //link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.67.661
20. French Cybersecurity Agency (ANSSI), Federal Office for Information Secu-
    rity (BSI), Netherlands National Communications Security Agency (NLNCSA),
    Swedish National Communications Security Authority: Position paper on quan-
    tum key distribution. Tech. Rep. 1.0, BSI (Jan 2024)
21. Fujioka, A., Suzuki, K., Xagawa, K., Yoneyama, K.: Strongly secure authenticated
    key exchange from factoring, codes, and lattices. In: Fischlin, M., Buchmann, J.,
    Manulis, M. (eds.) Public Key Cryptography – PKC 2012. pp. 467–484. Springer
    Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg (2012)
22. Giron, A., et al.: Post-quantum hybrid key exchange: a systematic mapping study.
    Journal of Cryptographic Engineering 13, 71–88 (2022)
23. Henrich, J., et al.: Performance impact of pqc kems on tls 1.3 under vary-
    ing network characteristics. In: Information Security: 26th Int. Conf. (ISC). p.
    267–287. Springer, Cham, Berlin, Heidelberg, DE (2023). https://doi.org/10.
    1007/978-3-031-49187-0_14
24. Hövelmanns, K., Planken, D., Schaffner, C., Verschoor, S.R.: Qkd oracles for au-
    thenticated key exchange (2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.12478
                                       HAKE for QKD(N) without Signatures            25

25. Hülsing, A., Ning, K.C., Schwabe, P., Weber, F.J., Zimmermann, P.R.: Post-
    quantum wireguard. In: 2021 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). pp.
    304–321. IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, US (2021). https://doi.org/10.1109/SP40001.
    2021.00030
26. International Telecommunication Union Telecommunication Standardization Sec-
    tor: ITU-T Y.3802 Quantum key distribution networks - Functional architecture.
    Tech. rep., ITU-T (2020)
27. International Telecommunication Union Telecommunication Standardization Sec-
    tor: ITU-T Y.3803 Quantum key distribution networks – Key management. Tech.
    rep., ITU-T (2020)
28. Krawczyk, H.: HMQV: A high-performance secure Diffie-Hellman protocol. In:
    Shoup, V. (ed.) CRYPTO 2005. LNCS, vol. 3621, pp. 546–566. Springer Berlin
    Heidelberg, Germany, Santa Barbara, CA, USA (Aug 14–18, 2005). https://doi.
    org/10.1007/11535218_33
29. Krawczyk, H.: Cryptographic extraction and key derivation: The HKDF scheme.
    In: Rabin, T. (ed.) CRYPTO 2010. LNCS, vol. 6223, pp. 631–648. Springer Berlin
    Heidelberg, Germany, Santa Barbara, CA, USA (Aug 15–19, 2010). https://doi.
    org/10.1007/978-3-642-14623-7_34
30. Li, J., et al.: Integration of quantum key distribution networks and classical net-
    works: An evolution perspective. IEEE Network 39(3), 180–187 (2025). https:
    //doi.org/10.1109/MNET.2025.3537691
31. Martin, V., et al.: Madqci: a heterogeneous and scalable sdn-qkd network deployed
    in production facilities. npj Quantum Information 10(1), 80 (2024)
32. Mayers, D.: Unconditional security in quantum cryptography. J. ACM 48(3),
    351–406 (May 2001). https://doi.org/10.1145/382780.382781, https://doi.
    org/10.1145/382780.382781
33. Mehic, M., et al.: Quantum key distribution: A networking perspective. ACM Com-
    put. Surv. 53(5), 1–41 (2020), https://doi.org/10.1145/3402192
34. Open Quantum Safe Project: liboqs-go: Go bindings for the open quantum
    safe library. https://github.com/open-quantum-safe/liboqs-go (2024), version
    0.14.0, accessed 2026-02-04
35. Open Quantum Safe Project: liboqs: Open quantum safe cryptographic library.
    https://github.com/open-quantum-safe/liboqs (2024), version 0.14.0, accessed
    2026-02-04
36. Páez, A., Boisjoly, G.: Exploratory Data Analysis, pp. 25–64. Springer Interna-
    tional Publishing, Cham (2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20719-8_
    2, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20719-8_2
37. Paquin, C., Stebila, D., Tamvada, G.: Benchmarking post-quantum cryptography
    in tls. In: Ding, J., Tillich, J.P. (eds.) Post-Quantum Cryptography. pp. 72–91.
    Springer International Publishing, Cham (2020)
38. (QKD), E.I.S.G.I.Q.K.D.: Quantum Key Distribution (QKD), Application Inter-
    face. etsi gs qkd 014 v1.1.1 (2019)
39. Ricci, S., Dobias, P., Malina, L., Hajny, J., Jedlicka, P.: Hybrid keys in practice:
    Combining classical, quantum and post-quantum cryptography. IEEE Access 12,
    23206–23219 (2024). https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3364520
40. Schanck, J., et al.: Criteria for selection of public-key cryptographic algo-
    rithms for quantum-safe hybrid cryptography. Tech. rep., IETF (2016), https:
    //datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-whyte-select-pkc-qsh-02
41. Schwabe, P., Stebila, D., Wiggers, T.: Post-quantum TLS without handshake sig-
    natures. In: Proceedings of the 2020 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer
26      S. Clermont and J. Henrich

    and Communications Security. p. 1461–1480. CCS ’20, Association for Comput-
    ing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2020). https://doi.org/10.1145/3372297.
    3423350
42. Shor, P.W.: Polynomial-time algorithms for prime factorization and discrete loga-
    rithms on a quantum computer. SIAM J. Comput. 26(5), 1484–1509 (Oct 1997).
    https://doi.org/10.1137/S0097539795293172
43. The Go Authors: Go standard library: crypto package. https://pkg.go.dev/
    crypto (2025), version go1.25.0, accessed 2026-02-04
44. Xu, G., Mao, J., Sakk, E., Wang, S.P.: An overview of quantum-safe approaches:
    Quantum key distribution and post-quantum cryptography. In: 2023 57th Annual
    Conference on Information Sciences and Systems (CISS). pp. 1–6. IEEE, Piscat-
    away, NJ, US (2023). https://doi.org/10.1109/CISS56502.2023.10089619
45. Zhong, X., Chen, L., Li, Y., Jin, G.: Design and verification of tcp/ip offload en-
    gine in quantum key distribution system. Review of Scientific Instruments 90(11),
    115102 (11 2019). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5117336, https://doi.org/10.
    1063/1.5117336
